Vitamin-K-deficiency coagulopathy in children of the first months of life: solved and actual problems
Brazhnikova O.V.1,2, Zaplatnikov A.L.1,2, Nikitin V.V.2, Efimov M.S.1, Dementyev A.A.1, Chabaidze Zh.L.1, Gavelya N.V.2, 
Ashurova B.A.2, Koroleva A.S.2, Potanina Yu.V.2, Trofimov A.A.2, Medoev S.B.2, Gaevy O.V.1,2, Podkopaev V.N.1,2, 
Aysanova M.R.1, Yagubian K.A.1

1 Russian Medical Academy of Сontinuous Professional Education, Moscow
2 Children’s City Clinical Hospital named after Z.A. Bashlyaeva, Moscow

Vitamin K-deficient coagulopathy is the most common cause of emergency hospitalization of children of the first months of life 
with hemorrhagic syndrome, which develops as a result of exclusive breastfeeding, biliary atresia, hereditary and acquired 
diseases with cholestasis and malabsorption syndrome, etc.  On the part of the mother, the main risk factors of vitamin-K-
deficiency, developing in the fetus and the newborn, are the use of indirect anticoagulants by a woman during pregnancy, 
anticonvulsant  drugs,  broad-spectrum  antibiotics,  severe  liver  and  bowel  disorders,  as  well  as  fetoplacental  insufficiency, 
gestosis, preeclampsia, etc. Clinical manifestations of vitamin-K-deficiency coagulopathy in children of the first weeks and 
months of life have low specificity and can be manifested by isolated cutaneous hemorrhoids syndrome, excessive bleeding, 
haemorrhages, and spontaneous hemorrhages (including intracranial hemorrhages). The issue of prescribing vitamin K for 
prophylactic purposes and the role of polymorphisms of the VKORC1 gene in the development of hemorrhagic syndrome with 
vitamin K deficiency in children of the first months of life are discussed.
Key  words:  vitamin  K,  vitamin  K-deficient  coagulopathy,  vitamin  K  epoxy  reductase,  hemorrhagic  neonatal  disease, 
breastfeeding, children, polymorphisms of VKORC1 gene.
For citation: Brazhnikova O.V., Zaplatnikov A.L., Nikitin V.V. et al. Vitamin-K-deficiency coagulopathy in children of the first 
months of life: solved and actual problems // RMJ. 2018. № 2(II). P. 75–78.