Diacerein in the treatment of knee osteoarthritis: comparative study
Lila A.M., Martynova L.V., Lila V.A.

Northwestern State Medical University named after I.I. Mechnikov

Background. Osteoarthritis (OA) is characterized by clinical heterogeneity and different rate of structural changes. Hence, the most important goals for clin-
icians and scientists are to identify patients with rapidly progressive disease and to develop optimal effective therapeutic algorithm.
Diacerein is a symptomatic slow-acting drug for OA (SYSADOA) which inhibits production and effects of interleukin-1.
Aim. To compare clinical efficacy, tolerability, and safety of Diaflex/diacerein and sodium chondroitin sulfate taking continuously for 12 months as well as
to evaluate the aftereffect of these drugs in knee OA.
Patients and methods. 30 patients (28 women and 2 men) with OA stages II-III were enrolled in the study. The overall duration of the study was 15 months
(12 months of taking the drugs and 3 months of the follow-up). The patients were randomized into two groups (15 patients each) to receive either Diaflex
(group 1) or sodium chondroitin sulfate (group 2).
Results and discussion. 12-month use of Diaflex and sodium chondroitin sulfate improves clinical signs of knee OA (pain, rigidity, movement limitation) even
after NSAID or paracetamol withdrawal or decrease in dosage. Diaflex reduces OA symptoms more rapidly (in 2-4 weeks) including small hand joints. This
phenomenon can be related to the mechanism of action of the drug. The aftereffect of Diaflex was superior to that of chondroitin thus indicating the im-
provement in WOMAC scale even after discontinuation of 12-month therapy.
Conclusions. In patients with comorbidities, diacerein effectively stops symptoms of osteoarthritis and minimizes side effects of the treatment due to the re-
duced dosage (duration of use) of NSAIDs and other drugs.
Keywords: diacerein, SYSADOA, osteoarthritis, comorbidity.
For citation: Lila A.M., Martynova L.V., Lila V.A. Diacerein in the treatment of knee osteoarthritis: comparative study // RMJ. Rheumatology. 2016. № 2.