Lipid-lowering and pleotropic effects of generic statins in high-risk cardiovascular disorders in outpatient treatment
Mikhin V.P., Zhilyaeva Yu.A., Chernyatina M.A., Vasil'eva D.A., Sushchenya O.N.

Kursk State Medical University

Currently, lipid-lowering therapy is available to many patients due to generic statins. However, the selection of optimal statins for high-risk and very high-
risk hypertensives is challenging. It is generally accepted that the prevention of atherosclerosis and associated fatal events should be performed using statins
with moderate anti-atherogenic effect only. According to earlier studies, lipid-lowering activity of atorvastatin Torvacard is similar to that of atorvastatin
Liprimar. In addition, this drug is characterized by pleotropic effects. However, target cholesterol levels cannot always be achieved with atorvastatin.
Aim. To assess lipid-lowering, anti-inflammatory, and endothelium-protective effects of rosuvastatin/Rosucard (Zentiva, Chech Republic/Sanofi, France) af-
ter atorvastatin treatment in high-risk and very high-risk hypertension.
Patients and methods. 114 patients with high-risk and very high-risk hypertension (SCORE) who received long-term hypotensive and lipid-lowering thera-
py with atorvastatin were included in the study. 1-year treatment with atorvastatin did not provide target cholesterol levels. As a result, atorvastatin was sub-
stituted for Rosucard. The levels of cholesterol and its fractions, endothelin-1, C-reactive protein (CRP), intima-media thickness (IMT), and endothelium de-
pendent vasodilation were measured.

РМЖ, 2016 № 19

1263


Актуальная проблема

Кардиология

Results. The substitution of long-term atorvastatin for rosuvastatin (Rosucard) provides target levels of atherogenic lipids, additionally reduces the concen-
trations of atherogenic lipids, CRP, and endothelin-1 and improves endothelium dependent vasodilation.
Conclusions. Rosuvastatin (Rosucard) corrects a variety of atherogenic factors. In addition to custom dosage, this property increases the efficacy of the pre-
vention of fatal and non-fatal events in these patients.
Key words: atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, atherosclerosis, hypercholesterolemia, endothelial dysfunction, arterial stiffness, cardiovascular risk.
For citation: Mikhin V.P., Zhilyaeva Yu.A., Chernyatina M.A. et al. Lipid-lowering and pleotropic effects of generic statins in high-risk cardiovascular disor-
ders in outpatient treatment // RMJ. 2016. № 19. P. 1263–1270.