Rational pharmacotherapy of depression, complicated by neurological symptoms: chronic pain syndrome and insomnia
A.V. Kuchaeva, M.L. Maximov

Kazan State Medical Academy

Aim: to study the effect of psycholeptics in patients with depression complicated by neurological symptoms for psychopharma-
cotherapy optimization.
Patients and Methods: 50 patients were involved in the retrospective study with a diagnosis of non-psychotic recurrent de-
pressive disorder, current episode of moderate severity, with neurological symptoms (F33.11 ICD-10), hospitalized in SAHI 
(State Autonomous Healthcare Institution) «Behterev Republican Clinical Psychiatric Hospital of the Ministry of Health of the 
Republic of Tatarstan» (Kazan), 2018. Dosing of neuroleptics was analyzed using Defined Daily Doses (DDD), certain Anatom-
ical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) Classification. Patients received the following treatment: antidepressant drugs, tranquilizers, 
neuroleptics,  bromides,  non-steroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  or  combinations  thereof.  Hamilton  Depression  Rating  Scale 
(HDRS) was used to determine the severity of depression in follow-up, to measure pain intensity — Wong-Baker Faces Pain 
Scale, to evaluate sleep quality — Leeds Sleep Questionnaire, to assess the treatment of depression with chronic pain syndrome 
and insomnia — Cost Minimization Method.
Results: the most effective in depression, with chronic pain syndrome and insomnia, is the combination of amitriptyline, sulpiri-
de and bromkamphora (Dobrocam) at the Defined Daily Doses (DDD) according to neurologists.

10

РМЖ, 2018 № 12 (I)НеврологияАктуальные проблемы
Hospital treatment of patients with chronic insomnia with amitriptyline, phenazepamum and bromkamphora (Dobrocam) re-
duced the average time duration of hospitalization, improved the quality of patients’ life, reduced frequency of seeking neuro-
logical care. Administering of bromocamphora reduced the heart rate in the treatment of insomnia in patients with the studied 
depression, while with the use of other studied sedatives (amitriptyline, sulpiride, phenazepamum) it was increasing.
Monotherapy of insomnia with bromkamphora (Dobrocam) was cheaper than other drugs in studied depression with neurolog-
ical symptoms.
Conclusion: the results of the study allow us to recommend the following studied drugs: amitriptyline, sulpiride, phenazepa-
mum, bromkamphora (Dobrocam) in the treatment of depression, complicated by neurological symptoms.
Key words: depression, chronic pain, age, occupational adaptation, insomnia, sedatives, rational pharmacotherapy.
For citation: Kuchaeva A.V., Maximov M.L. Rational pharmacotherapy of depression, complicated by neurological symptoms: 
chronic pain syndrome and insomnia // RMJ. 2018. № 12(I). P. 10–15.