Comparative evaluation of efficacy and safety of antianginal drug nicorandil in patients with coronary artery disease with stable angina pectoris, re-
ceiving β-blockers
Martsevich S.Yu., Kutishenko N.P., Deev A.D., on behalf of the KVAZAR study

State Research Center for Preventive Medicine , Moscow

Drug therapy is the main component of long-term treatment of patients with stable forms of coronary artery disease (CAD). Basic principles of sta-
ble CAD treatment were formed over 10 years ago, but still new drugs are added to improve the quality of treatment. So considerable interest is paid
to nicorandil, appeared more than 20 years ago and proved antianginal effects and positive influence on disease outcome in several large clinical
trilas.
Objective: To evaluate safety and influence of nicorandil in combination with standard therapy on clinical manifestations in patients with stable CAD.
Material and Methods: Double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involved 120 patients with verified CAD and stable angina pectoris. All patients received meto-
prolol 100 mg / day. Patients of the main group additionally received nicorandil 10 mg b.i.d., in 2 weeks the dose was increased to 20 mg b.i.d.. The control
group was prescribed placebo. Mean follow-up was 6 weeks.
Results: Nicorandil significantly decreased the number of angina attacks (compared with control period and control group). Also significant decrease of use
of short-acting nitrates was observed during taking the drug in both doses as compared with control period. Adverse events were observed in 10 (16.4%) pa-

1290

РМЖ, 2016 № 19


Кардиология

Актуальная проблема

tients out of 61, taking nicorandil, and in 7 (11.9%) out of 59 treated with placebo, the difference was not statistically significant. Due to headache develop-
ment 3 patients discontinued the study: 2 patients - in nicorandil group and 1 - in placebo group.
Conclusion: nicorandil administration additionally to standard therapy in patients with CAD and stable angina pectoris leads to significant reduction in the
number of angina attacks. Good tolerability profile of nicorandil was observed.
Key words: coronary artery disease, stable angina pectoris, nicorandil, antianginal effect.
For citation: Martsevich S.Yu., Kutishenko N.P., Deev A.D., on behalf of the KVAZAR study. Comparative evaluation of efficacy and safety of antianginal drug
nicorandil in patients with coronary artery disease with stable angina pectoris, receiving β-blockers // RMJ. 2016. № 19. P. 1290–1294.