Modern view on the pathogenetic mechanisms of Parkinson’s disease progression
D.O. Gaponov1, E.V. Prigodina1, T.V. Grudina1, A.E. Dorosevich1,2

1 Smolensk State Medical University
2 Smolensk Regional Institute of Pathology

The  article  discusses  the  modern  aspects  of  Parkinson’s  disease  development  in  light  of  the  latest  scientific  data  on  the 
mechanisms that are triggering in the presence of relevant factors of genetic predisposition. Special attention is paid to the 
preclinical stage of Parkinson’s disease since this stage is crucial in the cascade of pathogenetic reactions of the pathology 
under consideration. Thus, the article discusses immuno-inflammatory, neurohumoral, dysbiotic, and metabolic factors in the 
development  of  Parkinson’s  disease,  at  the  preclinical  stage  causing  structural  changes  in  both  the  central  and  peripheral 
nervous systems. The so-called enteral nervous system and biochemical changes in α-synuclein metabolism, which is pivotal 
in the pathogenesis of both Parkinson’s disease and Alzheimer’s disease and multiple sclerosis, occupy a special place in this 
issue.  A  special  role  in  this  review  is  given  to  the  role  of  the  «gut-brain»  axis  as  only  the  role  of  intestinal  microflora  and 
imbalance of the intestinal microbiota is considered by many authors to be underestimated in the mechanism of development of 
this pathology. This article is constructed in the form of a comparative analysis of the research of various authors in order to 
systematize the new aspects of the development of Parkinson’s disease that are currently being considered.
Key  words:  Parkinson’s  disease,  synucleinopathy,  pathogenesis  of  Parkinson’s  disease,  alpha-synuclein,  gut-brain  axis, 
neurodegenerative diseases, Alzheimer’s disease.
For citation: Gaponov D.O., Prigodina E.V., Grudina T.V., Dorosevich A.E. Modern view on the pathogenetic mechanisms of 
Parkinson’s disease progression // RMJ. 2018. № 12(I). P. 66–72.