The use of irrigation therapy with hypertensive solutions for the treatment of infectious rhinosinusitis in children
Garashchenko T.I.1,2, Tarasova G.D.1, Tulina A.S.1, Ilenko L.I.2, Garashchenko M.V.2, Lazareva S.I.2

1 Federal Scientific-Clinical Center of Otorhinolaryngology of the Federal Medico-Biological Agency of the Russian Federation, 
Moscow
2 Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow

Aim: to study the efficacy and safety of the Aqualor Forte nasal spray (hypertonic sea water solution) in children with acute 
infectious rhinosinusitis (AIRS).
Patients and Methods: 100 children aged from 6 to 14 years with AIRS participated in the study. Patients were divided into 
2 groups: group 1 - 50 patients received Aqualor Forte 3 times a day, group 2 - 50 children received a drug containing 0.1% 
xylometazoline solution 2-3 times a day. Patient examination was performed before the first application of the drugs and in 
15 minutes after the application, then after 1 hour, 72 ± 6 hours, 7 days. The dynamics of the course of the disease was assessed 
in scores, taking into account the subjective and objective symptoms of AIRS.
Results: a more pronounced decrease in subjective and objective symptoms of AIRS was detected during the monotherapy 
with Aqualor Forte, as compared to the use of xylometazoline drug. According to the data of anterior active rhinomanometry 
(AARM), the decongestive effect of xylometazoline was higher than that of Aqualor Forte in 15 minutes after the first 
application, it was comparable after 1 hour, but after 3 and 7 days the decongestive effect of Aqualor Forte was significantly 
higher. After 3 to 7 days of the use of xylometazoline there is a decrease of the total volumetric air flow and an increase of 
the AARM total resistance, which indicates a growing disorder in the microcirculation system of the mucous tunic of nose. 

РМЖ, 2018 № 2 ( II )

79


No such disorders were detected in the group of patients who used Aqualor Forte. The use of xylometazoline caused the 
undesirable effects in 20 (40%) patients. There were no undesirable effects in the group of patients treated with Aqualor 
Forte.
Conclusion:  Aqualor  Forte,  containing  the  hypertonic  natural  sterile  sea  water,  can  be  recommended  as  a  monotherapy  in 
children with AIRS for a safe relief of nasal breathing.
Key  words:  acute  infectious  rhinosinusitis,  hypertonic  sea  water  solution,  anterior  active  rhinomanometry,  treatment  of 
rhinosinusitis in children, Aqualor Forte.
For citation: Garashchenko T.I., Tarasova G.D., Tulina A.S. et al. The use of irrigation therapy with hypertensive solutions for the 
treatment of infectious rhinosinusitis in children // RMJ. 2018. № 2(II). P. 79–84.