Preclinical evaluation of the therapeutic potential of a radiopharmaceutical drug based on 5–10 micron albumin 
microspheres with rhenium-188
Zverev A.V.1, Klementieva O.E.2, Zhukova M.V.2, Krasnoperova A.S.2

1  Plant  “Medradiopreparat”,  a  branch  of  the  “Federal  Center  for  Design  and  Development  of  Nuclear  Medicine  Facilities” 
of FMBA of Russia, Moscow
2 Federal Medical Biophysical Center named after A.I. Burnazyan of FMBA of Russia, Moscow

The rheumatoid disease of joints is often accompanied by pain, limited mobility and leads to a gradual destruction of the joint. 
Currently, the method of choice in the treatment of this disease is a radionuclide therapy of joints (radiosynovectomy).
Patients and Methods: the study was performed on Wistar rats and chinchilla rabbits, in which an acute aseptic synovitis of the 
knee joint was simulated. A suspension based on 5-10 micron albumin microspheres labeled with rhenium-188 (MCA 5–10 
micron, 188Re) was intraarticularly introduced to perform the radiosynovectomy.
Results:  the  data  obtained  in  the  studies  of  rats  show  significant  differences  in  the  values    obtained  for  the  right  hind 
paw  in  animals  with  a  model  of  pathology  and  control  animals,  as  well  as  between  groups  of  treated  and  untreated 
animals. There is an increase in the proportion of the supporting function of the affected limb in animals treated with 
a radiopharmaceutical to  the results that are not significantly different from the control figures on the seventh day of 
observation. In the first two days the level of pain in the treated and untreated rabbits was the same, lameness of the 
supporting type was observed, there was practically no support for the diseased paw. On the fourth day, the rabbits, which 

31

РМЖ, 2018 № 4(I)РевматологияАктуальная проблема
recieved the intraarticularly injected drug, did not show a pain reaction during palpation and flexion of the limb. Lameness 
of the supporting type was practically not expressed. On the seventh day, the treated rabbits did not have lameness or 
signs of pain during palpation.
Conclusions: studies of the therapeutic potential of MCA 5–10 micron, 188Re performed on two types of laboratory animals 
with acute aseptic synovitis of the knee joint showed the effectiveness of its intraarticular administration according to the 
criteria for reducing the pain sensitivity of the affected limb in rats and the positive dynamics of restoring motor activity 
in rabbits.
Key words: joint, inflammation, radiosynovectomy, radiopharmaceutical, rhenium-188.
For citation: Zverev A.V., Klementieva O.E., Zhukova M.V., Krasnoperova A.S. Preclinical evaluation of the therapeutic potential 
of a radiopharmaceutical drug based on 5-10 micron albumin microspheres with rhenium-188 // RMJ. 2018. № 4(I). P. 31–35.