Recurrence of granulomatous polyangiitis, complicated by a persistent loss of vision, after withdrawal of 
immunosuppressive therapy
Kupriyanova I.N.1, Orlova O.L.2, Flyagina V.I.2

1 Ural State Medical University, Ekaterinburg
2 Central City Hospital №2 named after A.A. Mislavsky

Granulomatous  polyangiitis  (GPA)  is  a  systemic  granulomatous  necrotic  vasculitis  of  small  vessels,  with  the  predominant 
involvement of the upper respiratory tract, lungs and kidneys associated with antineutrophilous cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). 
GPA is considered to be a relatively rare disease. The incidence rate is about 5-10 (8.5) per 100 000 population per year. The 
average age of onset of the disease is 45 + 1.2 years. The disease has a multi-organ character, it has a variety of symptoms. Along 
with a typical triad in a generalized form, the disease can begin with a local lesion of upper respiratory tract and / or a vision organ. 
Debuting with the clinic of ulcerative necrotic rhinitis, sinusitis, lesion of the ear, trachea, larynx, the disease can be complicated 
with the perforation of the nasal septum with the saddle nose deformity, the development of severe destructive pancinusitis with 
the spread of granulomatous tissue into orbit, loss of hearing, stenosis of the larynx. The lesion of the organ of vision (50%) is often 
caused by the pseudotumor of the orbit due to the formation of periorbital granuloma, inflammation of the vascular tract of the 
eye, which leads to a decrease in visual acuity, and eventually to a persistent loss of vision. GPA diagnosing is based on the criteria 
of the American College of Rheumatology for establishing the form of systemic vasculitis. Timely initiated immunosuppressive 
GPA therapy (glucocorticosteroids (GCS), cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, genetically engineered biological preparations (GEBP) 
is aimed at the induction of remission and its maintenance, as well as the treatment of recurrence. On the example of the clinical 
case, clinical features and outcomes of ophthalmic manifestations of recurrence of granulomatous polyangiitis after the patient’s 
self-withdrawal of the immunosuppressive therapy are presented. Questions of interdisciplinary interaction of experts are covered. 
Key words: granulomatous polyangiitis, ANCA, systemic vasculitis, pseudotumor of the orbit, persistent loss of vision.
For citation: Kupriyanova I.N., Orlova O.L., Flyagina V.I. Recurrence of granulomatous polyangiitis, complicated by a persistent 
loss of vision, after withdrawal of immunosuppressive therapy // RMJ. 2018. № 4(I). P. 35–40.