Modern approaches to the correction of cognitive and emotional disorders in patients with chronic cerebral ischemia 
Shuteeva T.V.

Kursk State Medical University

Introduction: the article is devoted to the problem of cognitive and emotional disorders in chronic cerebral ischemia (CCI) and the possibilities of using citi-
coline in this pathology.
The aim of the study was to determine the possibility of using citicoline (Neipilept) to correct cognitive and anxiety-depressive manifestations in patients
with CCI on the background of traditional therapy.
Patients  and  methods:  the  study  included  clinical  examination  using  a  survey,  physical  and  auscultatory  methods;  neurological  examination  using  the
Tinetti scale; neuropsychological examination using a Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and a frontal dysfunction scale (FDS); HAM-A and HAM-D
assessments of anxiety and depression levels; a quality of life study using the SF-36 questionnaire. The study was carried out in 2 groups of patients with
CCI: main and control. The main group included 25 patients, men - 10 (40%), women - 15 (60%). Patients of the main group had the history of arterial hy-
pertension, cerebral atherosclerosis, acute disorders of cerebral circulation, obesity. The control group included 15 patients. According to the presence of so-
matic pathology, the distribution in the group was similar to the main group. Both groups of patients received standard traditional therapy, including an-
tiplatelet agents and vascular agents, and were comparable in age, type of complaints, clinical and neuropsychological examinations. Patients of the main
group received citicoline (Neipilept) 1000 mg orally for 30 days.
Results: it was noticed, that the group of patients, receiving citicoline along with the baseline therapy, had improvements in the cognitive and neuropsycho-
logical functions. The drug was well tolerated by patients, did not cause any adverse effects on the general clinical status of patients. Allergic reactions were
not reported, there were no exacerbations of concomitant somatic diseases.
Conclusion: the use of citicoline in complex therapy has a positive effect on the clinical course of the disease and increases the effectiveness of the treatment.
Key words: chronic cerebral ischemia, treatment of chronic cerebral ischemia, citicoline, Neipilept.
For citation: Shuteeva T.V. Modern approaches to the correction of cognitive and emotional disorders in patients with chronic cerebral ischemia // RMJ.