The place of emollients in the prevention of atopic dermatitis
S. N. Nezabudkin, A. S. Nezabudkina, I. S. Sardaryan, V. V. Pogorelchuk

St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University

It  is  known  that  one  of  the  factors  causing  the  development  of  atopic  dermatitis  (AtD)  is  a  violation  of  the  barrier  and 
protective functions of the skin. Emollients (softening and moisturizing creams, bathing products) are appointed to all the 
patients with AtD or with a risk of its developing, regardless of AtD severity, area, acuity of the skin process, presence or 
absence of complications.
The aim of the study was to prevent the AtD by the use of emollients in children of early age with known history of allergies.
Patients and Methods: 40 children participated in the study, aged 0 to 6 months. The observation period was 3 months.
Results:  in  group  1  the  evaluation  of  the  efficacy  of  the  prophylactic  administration  of  Atopic  emollients  was  made 
during  3  months  of  observation.  In  all  children  of  this  group  there  were  no  manifestations  of  AtD  during  the  time 
of  observation.  In  the  second  group,  where  simple  skin  care  products  (soap,  shampoo)  were  used,  17  children  had 
manifestations  of  mild  AtD  (SCORAD  6.9  ±  1.4).  To  these  children  pimecrolimus  was  administered  with  a  positive 
effect. 2 children had moderate to severe AtD manifestations (SCORAD 24,2 ± 2,7) which required methylprednisolone 
administration.
Conclusions: thus, the conducted study confirmed the necessity of using Atopik emollients for children with a history of 
allergies to prevent the development of AtD. A wide range of Atopic products allows to use them as a basic care, and as 
an additional means to topical anti-inflammatory therapy. No adverse reactions were observed during the use of these 
agents.
Key words: atopic dermatitis, epidermal barrier dysfunction, basic skin care algorithm, emollients, Atopic, methylprednisolone, 
pimecrolimus, simple skin care products.
For citation: Nezabudkin S.N., Nezabudkina A.S., Sardaryan I.S., Pogorelchuk V.V. The place of emollients in the prevention of 
atopic dermatitis // RMJ. 2018. № 2(II). P. 122–124.