Treatment of migraine in the outpatient practice
Koreshkina M.I.1, Danilov G.V.2
1 Headache Treatment Center of «Scandinavia» clinic, LLC «AVA-PETER», St. Petersburg
2 National Medical Research Center of Neurosurgery named after acad. N.N. Burdenko, Moscow

The problem of migraine treatment remains relevant, especially in the Russian Federation, where the frequency of migraine diagnosis lags behind its true
prevalence in the population.
Aim: to evaluate the effectiveness of the drug Xephocam Rapid (Lornoxicam) for relieving migraine attacks both in monotherapy and in combination with
triptans.
Patients and Methods: In a retrospective study, a 2-year analysis was conducted to assess the effectiveness of migraine treatment with Xephocam Rapid
(Lornoxicam) in outpatient management in the specialized Headache Treatment Center. The drugs for relieving migraine attacks were chosen individually,
taking into account the data of the headache diary for the 1-st month from the beginning of drug therapy. In this case, several ways of therapy were applied:
monotherapy with Xephocam Rapid or its combination with the drugs from triptans group. 
Results: Data on the use of Xephocam Rapid in 98 patients (90 women and 8 men, mean age 38.2 ± 10.2) with migraine were analyzed. Xephocam Rapid therapy
in the entire group of patients was effective in 79 (80.6%) patients and ineffective in 19 (19.4%). The efficacy of Xephocam Rapid was higher in the MA group
(92,3%) than in the MO group (76.4%), however, these differences did not reach statistical significance. The frequency of side effects when taking Xephocam Rapid
was low and did not require withdrawal of the drug. Side effects in the form of nausea and dyspepsia were observed in 3 patients in the MA group and 4 patients
in the MO group.
Conclusion: Xephocam Rapid showed its effectiveness, low level of side effects and can be recommended for a widespread use in outpatient practice not only
to neurologists, but also to family physicians.
Key words: migraine, migraine with aura, migraine without aura, chronic migraine, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, Xephocam Rapid.
For citation: Koreshkina M.I., Danilov G.V. Treatment of migraine in the outpatient practice // RMJ. 2017. № 21. P. 1525–1531.