Pharmacopuncture with a combined preparation of group B vitamins in the treatment of chronic pelvic pain in women
Tynterova A.M.1, Sharnina M.V.1, Rachin A.P.2

1 City multi-field hospital, Kaliningrad
2 Russian Research Center for Medical Rehabilitation and Balneology, Moscow

Syndrome  of  chronic  pelvic  pain  is  often  associated  with  symptoms  of  urinary  tract  damage,  sexual,  intestinal,  gynecological  dysfunction  or  impaired
function of the pelvic floor muscles with the absence of infection and other obvious pathology.
Aim: to  increase  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  therapy  for  patients  with  chronic  pelvic  pain  due  to  myofascial  pain  syndrome  with  combined  gynecological
pathology.
Patients and Methods: 88 women participated in the study, the mean age was 38.9 years. All patients were divided into 2 groups (the main and comparison
group) of 44 patients each, standardized according to the features under study. The patients with chronic pelvic pain were treated by the method of pharma-
copuncture with a combined multivitamin preparation containing a combination of neurotropic active substances of the vitamin B complex: thiamin (B1),
pyridoxine (B6) and cyanocobalamin (B12). Efficiency was assessed using a comprehensive pain questionnaire, trigger points response, Spielberg-Khanin
scales of state and personal anxiety. 
Results: in the course of diagnosing (gynecological and neurological examination), the following pathological conditions were detected in the patients: my-
ofascial pain syndrome (MFPS) of the piriform muscle (31.8%), MFPS of the elevator muscle of anus (56.8%), MFBS of both muscles 11.4%). The results of
the study made it possible to identify the relationship between the localization of trigger points (TP) and gynecological pathology. The use of pharmacopunc-
ture with a combined preparation of group B vitamins and reflexotherapy in patients with chronic pelvic pain, caused by myofascial pain syndrome and gy-
necological pathology, showed a significant decrease in the severity of the pain syndrome and the normalization of the psycho-emotional state.
Conclusion: accumulation of clinical experience requires a critical evaluation of the efficacy and safety of the existing and new ways of treating the chronic
pelvic pain.
Key words: chronic pelvic pain syndrome, pharmacopuncture, vitamins В1, В6 and В12.
For citation: Tynterova A.M., Sharnina M.V., Rachin A.P. Pharmacopuncture with a combined preparation of group B vitamins in the treatment of chronic
pelvic pain in women // RMJ. 2017. № 21. P. 1568–1572.