Algorithm for increasing the effectiveness of blood pressure control in arterial hypertension
Zagidullin N.Sh., Gareeva D.F., Sukhareva N.N.

Bashkiria State Medical University, Ufa

Now there is a great choice of antihypertensive drugs, however, it is not always possible to achieve effective control of arterial blood pressure (BP) in arter-
ial hypertension (AH). The reasons can be both pharmacokinetic features of the drugs themselves and the features of patient’s compliance. The article at-
tempts to create an algorithm for the selection of antihypertensive therapy based on valsartan and its combinations with hydrochlorothiazide and amlodip-
ine with insufficient control of blood pressure in all 3 grades of BP increase, taking into account the presence of risk factors and previous therapy. The algo-
rithm is based on studies with valsartan and its fixed combinations with hydrochlorothiazide and amlodipine, carried out in Russian patients inclusively. In
particular: valsartan and its combination with hydrochlorothiazide contribute to the successful control of blood pressure and a good therapeutic effect in the
majority of patients with AH of 1-2 grades. The combination of valsartan with amlodipine successfully controls arterial pressure in patients with higher
grades of blood pressure increase, regardless of risk factors and concomitant diseases: the systolic and diastolic BP figures decreased to target levels in 80%
of patients. Thus, an algorithm for the treatment of AH with valsartan and its combinations with hydrochlorothiazide and amlodipine as the basic antihy-
pertensive drugs was developed. Thereby, it was possible to achieve BP control in an overwhelming number of patients at different grades of BP increase.
Key words: arterial hypertension, arterial pressure, blood pressure, combined therapy, algorithm of antihypertensive therapy, valsartan.
For citation: Zagidullin N.Sh., Gareeva D.F., Sukhareva N.N. Algorithm for increasing the effectiveness of blood pressure control in arterial hypertension //
RMJ. 2017. № 20. P. 1429–1434.