Safe and effective aid for the first teeth eruption
Velikoretskaya M.D., Starostina L.S.

The First Moscow State Medical University named after I.M. Sechenov, Moscow

The first teething can be accompanied by swelling and reddening of the gums, increased salivation, fever, anxiety of the child, altered defecation pattern,
disturbance of sleep and appetite. The use of the teething gel for massage of the gums will help the child to endure an unpleasant period of teething.
The aim of the study was to assess the effectiveness, safety and tolerability of the teething gel Pansoral teething in children with painful symptoms of teething.
Patients and methods: 60 children aged 3 to 20 months (mean age 10.3) with local pain symptoms accompanying teething were included in the study. Moth-
ers applied the gel Pansoral teething with a finger on the painful gum area, lightly massaging, 1 to 5 times a day (including necessarily before bedtime).
The duration of the use of the gel did not exceed 7-8 days. Evaluation of the effectiveness of the dental gel was carried out by a doctor on the 1st, 4th and 8th
days of use. To assess these symptoms, severity scales were used, at the end of the observation period, parents were asked to fill in a questionnaire to evaluate
the criteria for the effectiveness of the gel.
Results: We have registered the positive results of using the teething gel Pansoral teething. Already on the fourth day of its use, there was a decrease
in the assessment of puffiness by 41% and gum hyperaemia by 53%. The gingival tenderness decreased by 40% and 73% on the 4th and 8th day, respectively.
The significance of the anxiety assessment decreased by 40% by the fourth day and by 80% by the 8th day of the use of the teething gel. 23% of 60 parents
assessed the application of the gel by 10 points, 50% - 9 points, a minimum score of 6.7 points was recorded in 8% (5) of the parents. All participants in this
study noted good tolerability of Pansoral teething and its pleasant organoleptic characteristics.
Conclusions: the use of the gel based on plant extracts facilitates the process of teething in children 1-2 years of age, allows to avoid undesirable reactions,
which can be caused by the use of preparations containing chemical anesthetics and anti-inflammatory drugs. Teething gel Pansoral teething is an effective
and safe means for the painful eruption of milk teeth.
Key words: children, teething, puffiness, gel Pansoral teething, efficiency, safety.
For citation: Velikoretskaya M.D., Starostina L.S. Safe and effective aid for the first teeth eruption // RMJ. 2017. № 19. P. 1341–1345.