Cough in the acute respiratory infections in children: expectant treatment, symptomatic treatment or pathogenetic therapy?
Zaplatnikov A.L.1,2, Girina A.A.3, Maikova I.D.2, Koroid N.V.2, Ivakhnenko Yu.I.1,2

1 Russian Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Moscow
2 Children's City Clinical Hospital named after Z.A. Bashlyaeva, Moscow 
3 Khanty-Mansiysk State Medical Academy

The highest incidence rate of acute respiratory infection (ARI), as well as the risk of complications, occurs in childhood. Frequent ARIs in children lead to a
significant material burden on the family budget and are accompanied by significant economic losses for the country as a whole. The article considers the
questions of pathogenesis, clinical picture of cough, algorithm of its treatment and features of therapy appointment. Discussing the rational use of medicines
for the cough treatment in children with ARI, it should be noted that most of the recommendations traditionally reflect an algorithm based on a clinical as-
sessment of cough. A detailed analysis of the characteristics of coughing is aimed at clarifying such parameters as frequency, paroxysm, intensity, produc-
tivity, soreness, sleep and appetite disorder, sputum character, etc. The presented algorithm of therapy requires a detailed description of the characteristics
of cough, which must be carried out in dynamics, because the nature of the cough depends on the period of the disease. The pathogenetic approach to the
cough therapy is based on the relief of inflammation in ARI, which is achieved by drugs with an anti-inflammatory mechanism of action. In this regard, the
innovative drug Rengalin with combined antitussive and anti-inflammatory effects is particularly interesting.
Key words: acute respiratory infection, childhood, cough, cough treatment algorithm, Rengalin.
For citation: Zaplatnikov A.L., Girina A.A., Maikova I.D. et al. Cough in the acute respiratory infections in children: expectant treatment, symptomatic treat-
ment or pathogenetic therapy? // RMJ. 2017. № 19. P. 1364–1367.