Chemical transcriptome analysis of glucosamine sulfate molecule in the context of post-genomic pharmacology
I.Yu. Torshin1,2, O.A. Gromova1,2, A.V. Naumov3, A.M. Lila4

1FRC CSC RAS, Moscow
2Lomonosov Moscow State University
3Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow
4Nasonova Research Institute of Rheumatology, Moscow

Aim: to study a glucosamine sulfate (GS) molecule effect on transcription in human fibroblasts of the FIBRNPC line.
Patients and Methods: chemotranscriptome analysis of the GS molecule effect on transcription in human fibroblasts of the FIBRNPC line was 
conducted during incubation of cells with GS for 24 hours.
Results: reliable dose-dependent effects of GS impact on transcription (on average, 5% or more changes in transcription per 1 μmol of GS) were 
shown for 4,431 of the 12,700 human genome annotation. Analyzes using functional genome annotation showed that GS substantially reduced 
the gene expression encoding inflammatory factors (100 genes) and genes involved in cell division (66 genes). Reducing the gene expression of 
these groups corresponds to the cell preparation to reduce inflammation and transition to a state of energy saving. GS modulated the gene expres-
sion involved in the restoration of cartilage and bone (reduced expression of 133 genes and increased expression of 188 genes). GS contributed 
to a predominant increase in the transcription of gene groups involved in maintaining cardioprotection (134 genes), neuroprotection (110 genes), 
detoxification processes (91 genes), and antiviral/antibacterial immunity (58 genes).
Conclusion: GS significantly reduced the pro-inflammatory gene expression, contributed to the cell transition to a state of energy saving, increased 
gene expression involved in the restoration of cartilage and bone, and, in general, increased fibroblast survival. Estimates of gene transcription 
changes correspond to an increase in the effectiveness of GS and indicate the prospects for using GS in patients suffering from both cartilage pathol-
ogy and other comorbid diseases (coronary heart disease, arrhythmias, cerebrovascular pathology, infectious, liver and kidney diseases, and others).
Keywords: chemical transcriptomics, chemical transcriptome analysis, glucosamine sulfate, Sustaguard Artro, data mining, molecular phar-
macology, comorbidity, cartilage, chondrocytes, chondroprotection.
For citation: Torshin I.Yu., Gromova O.A., Naumov A.V., Lila A.M. Chemical transcriptome analysis of glucosamine sulfate molecule in the 
context of post-genomic pharmacology. RMJ. 2019;1(I):2–9.