Clinical and economic analysis of the use of gene-engineering biological preparations in the treatment of polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Sevostyanov V.K.1,2, Zholobova E.S.3,4

1 Children’s city clinic No.122, Moscow
2 Research Institute of Health Organization and Medical Management, Moscow
3 Moscow City Center for Children's Rheumatology «Morozovskaya Children's City Clinical Hospital»
4 First Moscow State Medical University named after I.M. Sechenov, Moscow

A comparative clinical and economic analysis of genetically engineered biological preparations (GEBP) used in the treatment of polyarticular juvenile idio-
pathic arthritis (JIA) was conducted with the aim of selecting the most economically preferable alternative. In searching for data on the comparative efficacy
of GEBP, all the drugs used in patients with polyarticular JIA have shown high clinical efficacy in clinical trials and in real clinical practice. At the stage of
the pharmacoeconomic study, the direct costs of GEBP therapy for the polyarticular JIA were analysed, including the cost of the annual pharmacotherapy
course (52 weeks), as well as additional costs associated with the drugs administration, the other costs were assumed equal. As a result of the analysis of the
effectiveness of GEBP used for the treatment of the polyarticular JIA, the most preferred alternative from the point of view of the "cost minimization" analysis
are the etanercept and abatacept drugs, since these treatment schemes require the least costs for the annual course of the patient’s treatment. In real clinical
practice, the choice of the drug should also be carried out in accordance with the «portrait of the patient».
Key words: genetically engineered biological therapy, clinical and economic analysis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis.
For citation: Sevostyanov V.K., Zholobova E.S. Clinical and economic analysis of the use of gene-engineering biological preparations in the treatment of pol-
yarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis // RMJ. 2017. № 19. P. 1385–1390.