Innovative skin care products for children with atopic dermatitis
Migacheva N.B.1, Orlov E.V.1, Chaplygina S.I.1,2, Khlopova E.A.2, Tyambina O.A.1, Nasyrova L.N.1, Osipova E.A.1

1 Samara State Medical University
2 Children's City Clinical Hospital № 1 named after. N.N. Ivanova, Samara

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is the most common disease among chronic dermatoses and one of the most urgent problems in pediatrics. In recent years, topical
nonsteroidal skin care products with an anti-inflammatory effect have appeared. They are comparable with anti-inflammatory drugs by their effectiveness.
The aim of the study was to evaluate the effectiveness of «Atopik» new innovative skin care products («Atopik Soothing Cream» and «Atopic Cream for Inten-
sive Care») for children with mild to moderate atopic dermatitis.
Patients and methods: the patients were children aged from 1 year to 12 years with a mild and moderate atopic dermatitis. Three visits were performed: the
first one was screening (the first day of observation), during which all participants were given recommendations on nutrition and skin care using «Atopik
cream for daily care». The second one was the basic (the 14th day of observation), the patients were randomized and divided into 2 groups: the children of
the 1st group received «Atopik cream soothing» as an additional skin care, and the children of the second group - «Atopic cream for intensive care». The third
visit was the final (the 28th day of observation). The EASI index was used as the main objective criterion. In addition, we studied the moisture parameters of
the stratum corneum and transepidermal moisture loss (TEML), the intensity of itching was assessed using the Visual Analog Scale (VAS).
Results of the study. In the first group of children, the clinical efficacy of the test product was confirmed by a significant decrease of the EASI index, a
positive trend was observed in the analysis of the VAS index, the values of the TEML also differed at the final visit, changes in the moisture content of the
stratum corneum during the follow-up period were statistically unreliable. In the second group of children, in the majority of the studied parameters (except
for the moisture level of the stratum corneum), a pronounced positive dynamics was also observed.
Conclusions: Improvement of the course of AtD in patients of both groups was manifested by a decrease in the severity of the majority of clinical symptoms
of the disease, a decrease in the prevalence of the skin process, relief of itching, which was confirmed by a positive dynamics of objective indicators of skin
condition and, in the parents' opinion, was accompanied by a decrease in symptoms of anxiety of the observed children and normalization of the night sleep.
Key words: atopic dermatitis, children, skin care products, Atopic.
For citation: Migacheva N.B., Orlov E.V., Chaplygina S.I. et al. Innovative skin care products for children with atopic dermatitis // RMJ. 2017. № 19. P. 1391–1395.