The use of mildronate in the treatment of cognitive impairments in vascular dementia
Gimoyan L.G., Silvanyan G.G.

Yerevan State Medical University named after M. Heratsi

One of the global problems in modern medicine is the problem of preserving and restoring higher mental functions. More than 20 million people in the world
suffer from dementia according to WHO.
Aim: to determine the efficacy and safety of Mildronate® in the treatment of vascular cognitive impairments and to find additional possibilities of its long-
term use as part of a combination therapy.
Patients and methods: a comparative observational program was conducted, during which Mildronate® was prescribed in drip infusions in a daily dose of
1000 mg of the preparation in 250 ml of physiological saline once a day for 10 days with further switching to oral administration of 500 mg twice a day for
3 months. The study group included 120 patients with a diagnosis dyscirculatory encephalopathy with cognitive impairment. The results were compared
with  the  control  group  of  patients  (n  =  135)  who  had  a  history  of  cerebrovascular  disease  (stroke,  transient  ischemic  attack),  with  dyscirculatory  en-
cephalopathy with cognitive impairment and took acetylcholinesterase inhibitors as part of complex therapy. According to the degree of cognitive impairment
the patients of both groups were divided into 3 subgroups.
Results: the study of cognitive functions revealed a statistically significant shortening time of remembering  of 10 words in patients treated with Mildronate®.
According to the clock drawing test, 32 patients managed to achieve the normal level of recovery. Against the background of the therapy, there was also an
improvement in the quality of sleep. Complex therapy with Mildronate® had a positive impact on such an integral evaluation as the patient's quality of life. In
the study group, the proportion of patients with an improvement in cognitive functions was significantly greater, and the number of patients with the absence
of the effect was almost 2 times less than in the control group.
Conclusion: the use of Mildronate® has a direct effect on dysfunction, harmonizes the motor and emotional sphere, significantly improves the quality of life
and reduces the manifestations of comorbid pathology.
Key words: cognitive impairments, diagnosis, metabolic therapy, Mildronate®.
For  citation: Gimoyan  L.G.,  Silvanyan  G.G. The  use  of  mildronate  in  the  treatment  of  cognitive  impairments  in  vascular  dementia //  RMJ.  2017.  №  21.