Neuromyelitics optica (Devic’s syndrome) is a rare variant of the nervous system impairment  
in systemic lupus erythematosus
E.S. Vinogradova1, P.I. Novikov2, S.V. Moiseev1,2

1 Faculty of Fundamental Medicine of the Moscow State University, Moscow
2 Tareev Clinic of Nephrology, Internal and Occupational Diseases, University Clinical Hospital No.3,  
  Sechenov University, Moscow

Neuromyelitics optica or Devic’s syndrome is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system, affecting 
mainly the optic nerve and spinal cord. In 50–70% of cases, association with systemic diseases of the connective tissue, such 
as systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjogren disease, and others, is determined. In this case, the question of the secondary nature 
of the disease remains open. The clinical picture is characterized by a combination of optic neuritis syndromes and/or longi-
tudinal-transverse myelitis. Imaging methods are used for diagnostics, such as optical coherence tomography, event-related 
potentials method, magnetic resonance imaging. At present, the key method of making the correct diagnosis is the detection of 
a specific serological marker — antibodies to aquaporin-4 (NMO-IgG), the titer of which correlates with disease activity and 
helps the differential diagnosis. Detection of Devic’s syndrome in combination with rheumatic diseases determines the tactics 
of more active immunosuppressive treatment. The article describes the clinical case of a young patient with systemic lupus ery-
thematosus and Devic’s syndrome. The prognosis and severity of the disease determined the presence of neuromyelitics optica. 
As induction therapy, ultrahigh doses of glucocorticosteroids, cyclophosphamide replaced with azathioprine as a supportive 
treatment with a positive clinical and laboratory response were used.
Key  words:  neuromyelitics  optica,  Devic’s  syndrome,  autoimmune  pathology,  systemic  lupus  erythematosus,  antibodies  to 
aquaporin-4, aquaporin-associated syndromes, demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system.
For citation: Vinogradova E.S., Novikov P.I., Moiseev S.V. Neuromyelitics optica (Devic’s syndrome) is a rare variant of the 
nervous system impairment in systemic lupus erythematosus // RMJ. 2018. № 12(II). P. 103–106.