Tics and combodine disorders of the children’s age
Zykov V.P.1, Kashirina E.A.2, Naugolnykh Yu.V.2

1 Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional Education, Moscow 
2 Children's City Clinic No. 110, Moscow

Tics are the dominant form of children’s hyperkinesia, which is diagnosed in 5% - 24% of children, more often in boys. Сhronic tics are observed in 1% of chil-
dren.
The aim of the research was to study comorbid disorders in children with tic hyperkinesia and to assess the possibilities of the drug correction.
Patients and Methods: 165 children and adolescents aged from 7 to 16 years were examined. Patients of the main group (n = 130) were divided into 3
groups: group 1- motor tics (n = 21), group 2 - motor and vocal tics (n = 87), 3rd group - Tourette syndrome (TS) (n = 22). The patients were prescribed a
tic therapy. An assessment of tic hyperkinesia, personal and situational anxiety was made, as well as a neuropsychological study (including the study of
short-term auditory and verbal memory) with the use of various scales and questionnaires.
Results and discussion: the maximum number of motor and vocal tics according to the method of tic counting for 20 minutes and the highest YGTSS were
determined in the TS group. ADHS was detected in 42.8% of patients with motor tics, in 50.6% of patients with motor and vocal tics and in 86.4% of patients
with TS. There was a significant decrease in the volume of short-term auditory and verbal memory in comparison with the control group, and a significant
decrease in the volume of the auditory memory was characteristic for the patients with TS as compared to the patients with motor tics. During the treatment,
the regression of ADHS manifestations and anxiety disorders in patients with motor and motor-vocal tics was observed. In patients with TS, consistently
high rates of personal anxiety and ADHS were registered before and after the treatment. An increase in the volume of short-term auditory and verbal memory
was recorded in all groups with tics and TS.
Key words: tic hyperkinesia, Tourette syndrome, ADHS, tic therapy, short-term auditory memory. 
For citation: Zykov V.P., Kashirina E.A., Naugolnykh Yu.V. Название статьи // RMJ. 2017. № 21. P. 1581–1585.