Provoking factors influence on the course of acute allergic reactions (urticaria and angioedema) in children
S.I. Bardenikova1, S.Yu. Snitko1, O.B. Dovgun2, E.A. Lobanova2, N.I. Drozdova2

1Evdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry
2St. Vladimir Children’s City Clinical Hospital, Moscow

Aim: to determine the provoking factors (drugs or food) effect on the clinical picture and course of acute allergic (AAR) and pseudoallergic 
reactions (PAR).
Patients and Methods: 192 children’s medical histories with «urticaria» and «angioedema» (patients were hospitalized) underwent a retro-
spective analysis. The following comparison groups were formed: group 1 — 46 children with drug hypersensitivity (DH); group 2 — 77 chil-
dren with AAR/PAR, developed in response to food intake. Adding that, the next clinical and laboratory examinations were conducted — dif-
ferential blood cell count, eosinophil count, and liver function tests. Other studies have also been performed (as indicated).
Results: there were a 2-fold decrease in the food factors significance (from 60.6% in infants to 28.8% in children over the age of 12 years) and a 3-fold 
increase in the role of medicines (from 9.1 to 28.8%, respectively) in the AAR/PAR progression as the child grows up. In group 1, the AAR/PAR cause 
was antibiotics in 30.4% of cases (of which aminopenicillins — in 86%). In group 2, AAR/PAR food factors were products of animal origin in 30% of 
cases, vegetable food — in 40.3%, and sweets — in 20.8%. In group 1, there was a prevalence of urticaria (in 52%) and a combination of urticaria with 
angioedema (in 26.1%). In group 2, angioedema without urticaria was found in 16.9% of cases, in combination with urticaria — in 53.2%.
Conclusion: in this study, the features of the AAR/PAR course and clinical picture in children were established. This can provide practical 
guidelines in the differential diagnosis and tactics for further patient management.
Keywords: acute allergic/pseudoallergic reactions, provoking factors, children, food allergy, drug allergy, urticaria, angioedema.
For citation: Bardenikova S.I., Snitko S.Yu., Dovgun O.B. et al. Provoking factors influence on the course of acute allergic reactions (urticaria 
and angioedema) in children. RMJ. 2019;1(II):71–76.