Obesity and bronchial asthma. Clinical and allergological characteristics
E.F. Glushkova, N.V. Shartanova, L.V. Luss

“National Research Center — Institute of Immunology” Federal Medical-Biological Agency of Russia, Moscow

Obesity,  which  is  considered  one  of  the  risk  factors  for  the  development  of  bronchial  asthma  (BA),  and  the  reasons  for  its 
insufficient control, can probably influence the inflammation of the respiratory tract. However, the nature of these relationships 
needs to be clarified.
Aim: to give a clinico-functional allergological and endocrinological characteristic, to highlight the features of the course and 
to determine the tactics of treating patients suffering from bronchial asthma in combination with obesity.
Patients and Methods: the study was conducted on the basis of the National Research Center — Institute of Immunology of 
Federal  Medical-Biological  Agency  of  Russia,  both  in  the  outpatient  and  inpatient  conditions.  A  statistical  analysis  of  367 
patients with different body mass index (BMI), who received an inpatient treatment for the exacerbation of asthma of varying 
severity,  was  performed.  Forty  patients  with  asthma,  who  met  all  entry  criteria  and  did  not  have  exclusion  criteria,  were 
examined on an outpatient basis.
Results: the analysis of the data showed, that the prevalence of obesity among the 367 patients, suffering from asthma and 
treated on inpatient basis in 2013–2015, was 44.9%, which is comparable to the prevalence of obesity in the general population. 
Thus, at the age of 18–30 the prevalence of obesity was 30%, 31–40 years — 37.93%, 41–50 years — 45.78%, 51–60 years — 
55.88%. The severity of asthma in patients with normal, excessive body mass and obesity did not have statistically significant 
differences in patients of these groups. The structure of phenotypes of bronchial asthma was also comparable among patients 
with different BMI.
The present study found that the severity of BA in patients with obesity increases with the age, that is, the older the patient, the 
more severe clinical course of asthma.

4

РМЖ, 2018 №8(I)Аллергология/ИммунологияОригинальные статьи
Conclusion: when analyzing the data of the study in inpatient and outpatient patients suffering from asthma and obesity, it was 
established that obesity does not affect the severity of the clinical course of asthma. It is shown that obesity does not affect the 
control of symptoms of asthma.
Key words: bronchial asthma, metabolic syndrome, obesity, body mass index, VRI diagnostics.
For citation: Glushkova E.F., Shartanova N.V., Luss L.V. Obesity and bronchial asthma. Clinical and allergological character-
istics // RMJ. 2018. № 8(I). P. 4–8.