Clinical and cytokine-modulating efficacy of a composition of three muramylpeptides containing a meso-diaminopimelic 
acid residue in the treatment of chronic pyoderma
O.I. Letyaeva1,2, O.R. Ziganshin1, D.A. Markeeva2, Yu.V. Blokhina3, N.Yu. Alekseeva4, N.I. Baranova4, O.V. Kalyuzhin5

1 South Ural State Medical University, Chelyabinsk
2 Multidisciplinary Professorial Clinic CityMed of the Center of “Ecology of Health”, Chelyabinsk
3 Chelyabinsk Regional Clinical Dermatovenerologic Dispensary
4  Penza  Physicians’  Continuing  Education  Institute  —  Branch  of  “Russian  Medical  Academy  of  Continuous  Professional  
   Education”
5 Sechenov University, Moscow

9

РМЖ, 2018 №8(I)Аллергология/ИммунологияОригинальные статьи
Insufficiency of anti-infectious defense is one of the main causes of onset and recurrences of skin infections. In this regard, 
immunomodulators can be a useful option for complex treatment of chronic forms of these diseases. Special attention should be 
paid to low molecular weight fragments of peptidoglycan of bacterial cell wall, muramylpeptides.
Aim: to evaluate the clinical efficacy of a standardized composition of three muramylpeptides containing a meso-diaminopimelic 
acid  residue  (Polymuramyl)  and  the  effect  of  this  immunomodulator  on  the  delayed  dynamics  of  the  concentration  of 
proinflammatory and regulatory cytokines in patients with chronic recurrent pyoderma.
Patients and Methods: 35 men aged 23-55 years with recurrence of chronic pyoderma (ostiofolliculitis, folliculitis, sycosis, 
furunculosis) were included in the study. Patients were randomized into two groups: the patients in the group of comparison 
(n=17) received standard treatment for recurrence of the disease; the patients in the main group (n=18), in addition to the 
standard treatment, received intramuscular injections of Polymuramyl at a dose of 200 mg daily from day 1 to 5 of the study. 
Clinical symptoms of pyoderma were assessed on days 0-7, 14, and then after 1 and 6 months of the study. The level of cytokines 
(TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-8, IL-10) in blood plasma was determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay on days 0 and 
14, and then after 6 months of follow-up.
Results: the inclusion of Polymuramyl in the complex treatment of recurrence of chronic pyoderma in men accelerated the 
regression of the main clinical manifestations of the disease and provided the induction of persistent remission. Clinical efficacy 
of Polymuramyl correlated with a decrease in the level of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in blood plasma on the day 14 
and at 6 months of follow-up. The adverse effects associated with the treatment and cases of intolerance to the immunomodulator 
have not been recorded.
Conclusion:  the  effectiveness  and  safety  of  Polymuramyl  in  the  treatment  of  recurrence  of  chronic  pyoderma  have  been 
confirmed. The ability of this immunomodulator to induce persistent remission of this disease has been revealed.
Key words: chronic pyoderma, skin infection, muramylpeptides, meso-diaminopimelic acid, Polymuramyl, immunomodulator, 
symptom regression, remission induction, cytokines.
For citation: Letyaeva O.I., Ziganshin O.R., Markeeva D.A. et al. Clinical and cytokine-modulating efficacy of a composition 
of  three  muramylpeptides  containing  a  meso-diaminopimelic  acid  residue  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  pyoderma  //  
RMJ. 2018. № 8(I). P. 9–13.