Experience with sublingual immunotherapy in patients with sensitization to house dust mites
E.M. Kostina, B.A. Molotilov

Penza  Physicians’  Continuing  Education  Institute  —  Branch  of  “Russian  Medical  Academy  of  Continuous  Professional  
Education

Allergen-specific  immunotherapy  (ASIT)  is  a  modern  method  of  treatment  of  allergic  diseases  (AD).  Sublingual  allergen 
administration  is  considered  to  be  the  most  convenient,  safe  and  promising.  Sensitization  to  house  dust  mites  (HDM) 
Dermatophagoides farinae (D. farinae) and Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (D. pteronyssinus) is detected in more than 50% 
of patients with allergic rhinitis (AR) and bronchial asthma (BA). The importance of the molecular proteins Der p 1, Der p 2, 
Der p 23, Der f 1, and Der f 2 in development of clinical symptoms of asthma and rhinitis with household sensitization has been 
established. The ASIT, which based on major allergens, significantly improves treatment effectiveness. An introduction of new 
standardized allergens into practice enhances the ASIT capacity and makes it safer and more successful.
Aim:  to  evaluate  effectiveness  of  sublingual  allergen-specific  immunotherapy  (SLASIT)  with  a  drug  «Mixture  of  mites»  
in patients with bronchial asthma with the household sensitization.
Patients and Methods: 47 patients with a diagnosis of allergic form of bronchial asthma (ABA) caused by house dust mites  
(D. farinae and D. pteronyssinus) atopy were under supervision. Clinical laboratory, allergic-immunological examination has 
been provided. 30 subjects with the diagnosis of ABA were on sublingual ASIT with the drug «Allergens of mites», a control group 
was 17 subjects who received standard therapy with inhaled glucocorticosteroids (ICS).
Results: the SLASIT is a highly effective pathogenetic method of AD therapy. During treatment, there was a significant decrease 
of levels of total IgE, asIgE to the Der p 1 and Der p 2, and a significant diminution of intensity of skin tests with HDM allergens. 

14

РМЖ, 2018 №8(I)Аллергология/ИммунологияОригинальные статьи
A  good  tolerability  of  the  SLASIT  has  been  registered.  There  were  side  reactions  in  local  reactions  form  in  only  5  patients 
(16.5%). Efficacy of the SLASIT was 83.3% after the first year of treatment, 86.6% after the second year and 93.3% after the 
third year of therapy. Reduction of clinical symptoms and asthma recurrence frequency, and decrease of anti-inflammatory 
therapy quantity has been registered clinically.
Conclusion: the SLASIT is a safe, highly effective method of immunotherapy for AD. Clinical efficacy of the SLASIT is expressed 
in the decrease in intensity of allergic inflammation, changes in clinical symptoms of the ABA and AR, diminution in frequency 
of recurrences and lessening in volume of anti-inflammatory therapy.
Key words: bronchial asthma, home dust mites, allergen-specific immunotherapy, molecular diagnostics, Allergens of mites.
For citation: Kostina E.M., Molotilov B.A. Experience with sublingual immunotherapy in patients with sensitization to house 
dust mites // RMJ. 2018. № 8(I). P. 14–18.