Bronchodilator therapy in the «real-life» clinical practice: comparison of original foreign and russian generic drugs
Vizel A.A.1, Ermolova S.O.2, Berdnikova N.G.3, Mikhoparova O.Yu.4, Salakhova I.N.1, Vafina A.R.1

1 Department of Phthisiopulmonology of Kazan State Medical University 
2 Department of pulmonology of the Leningrad Regional Clinical Hospital (St. Petersburg) 
3 Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Propaedeutics of Internal Diseases of the First Moscow State Medical University named after I.M. Sechenov
4 Clinical Hospital of «Medical and Sanitary Unit of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation for the Republic of Tatarstan» (Kazan)

Obstructive lung diseases are defined by the order of the Russian Ministry of Health and the Government of the Russian Federation as socially significant.
The availability of original and generic medicinal products in the country is a matter of national security and a guarantee of medicinal provision for the cit-
izens of the country.
The aim of the work was to compare the effect of the original and generic short-acting domestic bronchodilators on the volume of forced expiratory flow
(FEV1) in the «real-life» clinical practice sampling in patients with obstructive pulmonary disease.
Patients and methods: A total of 238 patients were examined (160 men and 78 women, 67.2% and 32.8%) whose mean age was 60.5±0.96 (20 to 87 years,
median 65 years, standard deviation±14.8 years). There were 92 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 104 – with bronchial asth-
ma (BA), 42 (38.7%, 43.7%, 17.6%, respectively) – with a combination of COPD / BA.

РМЖ, 2017 № 18

1275


Оригинальные статьи

Болезни дыхательных путей

The following inhalations solutions bronchodilators were performed by nebulizer: 38 patients received Salbutamol-native, 126 -Ipraterol-native, 74-Berodual
solution (16%, 52.9% and 31.1%, respectively). The results were collected and processed in SPSS-18.
Results: In evaluating all the patients all three drugs led to a significant increase in FEV1. Mean values in all subgroups corresponded to a positive sample
with bronchodilator (more than 12% and 200 ml or more). In the combination of COPD / BA, the mean values of the FEV1 increase corresponded to a positive
sample with a bronchodilator only after Berodual's solution and Ipraterola-native. When patients were leveled by sex, age and degree of bronchial obstruc-
tion, it was found that in COPD and bronchial asthma, the broncholytic effect of Ipratherola-native did not differ significantly in the increase in FEV1 in pa-
tients with COPD compared Berodual's solution, but was even more stable than in Berodual's solution. And only in Ipraterol-native, the increase in FEV1 was
statistically significant in all subgroups of patients.
The conclusion: Our multicenter study confirmed the clinical equivalence of the original foreign and generic domestic drugs when performing a test with a
bronchodilator in the «real-life» medical practice in patients with obstructive pulmonary disease.
Key words: fenoterol / ipratropium, salbutamol, bronchodilators, COPD, bronchial asthma, import substitution.
For citation: Vizel A.A. Ermolova S.O., Berdnikova N.G. et al. Bronchodilator therapy in the «real-life» clinical practice: comparison of original foreign and
russian generic drugs // RMJ. 2017. № 18. P. 1275–1280.