Preliminary results of the effect of bronchial valve blocking on the respiratory function in patients with pulmonary tuberculosis with concomitant
chronic nonspecific lung diseases
Myshkova E.P., Sklyuev S.V.

Novosibirsk Scientific Research Institute of Tuberculosis

The article presents a retrospective analysis of the results of treatment of patients with infiltrative pulmonary tuberculosis in the phase of decay with con-
comitant chronic nonspecific lung diseases.
The aim of the study was to evaluate the effect of bronchial valve blocking on the respiratory function in patients with infiltrative destructive pulmonary tu-
berculosis with concomitant chronic nonspecific lung diseases.
Patients and methods: 102 patients were included in an open comparative retrospective study. In 49 patients (main group), the endobronchial valve was used
in the treatment, and 53 patients (comparison group) received standard antituberculous polychemotherapy. The parameters of the respiratory function (RF)
were determined at three critical points during hospitalization and in the long-term period.
Results: the installation of an endobronchial valve led to a slight decrease in the level of vital lungs capacity (VLC) and the forced expiration volume. After
removal of the valve, these RF values came to the initial level. Standard polychemotherapy of patients in the comparison group contributed to a 6% decrease
in the VLC values   below the baseline, while the level of bronchial patency was preserved. At the final measurement in the main group, the proportion of pa-
tients with normal volumetric RF values   increased with a simultaneous decrease in the proportion of patients with moderate and significantly reduced rates.
Also in the main group there was an increase in the proportion of patients with normal indices of bronchial patency, and in the comparison group the pro-
portion of patients with normal indices remained at the same level.
Conclusion: the use of the endobronchial valve results in a non-significant (less than 10% decrease in relation to the initial indices) and reversible disruption
of both volume and bronchial patency of respiratory function. There is a significant irreversible decrease in the parameters of the respiratory function dur-
ing the long treatment of patients with infiltrative pulmonary tuberculosis.
Key words: pulmonary tuberculosis, bronchial valve blocking, endobronchial valve, spirometry, complications.
For citation: Myshkova E.P., Sklyuev S.V. Preliminary results of the effect of bronchial valve blocking on the respiratory function in patients with pulmonary
tuberculosis with concomitant chronic nonspecific lung diseases // RMJ. 2017. № 18. P. 1296–1299.