Observational study of the efficiency and safety of the use of tenoxicam in dorsalgy in comparison with meloxicam and 
diclofenac-sodium
Rachin A.P., Vygovskaya S.N., Nuvakhova M.B., Voropaev A.A., Tarasova L.Yu.

National Medical Research Center for Rehabilitation and Balneology, Moscow

Dorsalgia is an actual interdisciplinary problem that adversely affects the life of a person and significantly violates his quality 
of life.
Aim: to assess the efficacy and safety of use of Artoxan (tenoxicam) in dorsalgia in comparison with meloxicam and diclofenac 
sodium.
Patients and Methods: patients enrolled in the study were randomized to one of the following groups: group 1 (Artoxan) — 
30  patients  with  chronic  dorsalgia  exacerbation,  receiving  a  complex  of  procedures  and  the  drug  Artoxan  (intramuscular 
injection, 20 mg daily) for 3 days. Group 2 (meloxicam) — 20 patients receiving a complex of procedures and preparation 
meloxicam (intramuscular injection, 15 mg daily) for 3 days. Group 3 (diclofenac sodium) — 20 patients receiving a complex 
of procedures and preparation diclofenac sodium (intramuscular injection, 75 mg daily) for 3 days. The following evaluation 
methods were used in the study: clinical-neurological and anamnestic study; visual analogue scale (VAS); verbal scale; complex 
pain questionnaire; Oswestrovsky painful questionnaire.
Results:  the  obtained  data  showed  that  in  comparison  with  other  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory  drugs  (NSAIDs)  Artoxan 
significantly reduces algic manifestations of back pain, improves the vital activity and quality of life of patients. Artoxan has a 
high safety profile, which is confirmed by the lack of adverse drug effects during the therapy.

43

РМЖ, 2018 № 4(II)НеврологияОригинальные статьи
Conclusion: in comparison with meloxicam and diclofenac sodium, Artoxan (tenoxicam) significantly improves the quality of 
life of patients and the performance of patients with acute dorsalgia, which makes it the drug of choice when prescribing NSAIDs 
to this category of patients.
Key words: dorsalgia, back pain, pain syndrome, tenoxicam, Artoxan.
For citation: Rachin A. P., Vygovskaya S.N., Nuvakhova M.B. et al. Observational study of the efficiency and safety of the use of 
tenoxicam in dorsalgy in comparison with meloxicam and diclofenac-sodium // RMJ. 2018. № 4(II). P. 43–46.