Results of the intermittent regimen of initial pain therapy with chondroitin sulfate and glucosamine sulfate for patients with 
osteoarthritis, back pain and comorbidity
Naumov A V.1, Sharov M.N.2, 3, Khovasova N.O.2, Prokofieva Yu.S.2
1 Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow
2 A. I. Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry
3 City Clinical Hospital named after S.I. Spasokukotsky, Moscow
The aim of the study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the intermittent regimen of therapy with chondroitin sulfate (CS) 
and glucosamine sulfate (GS) in the relapses of chronic pain in the joints and back.
Patients and Methods: an open prospective comparative study was conducted to assess the efficacy and safety of the intermittent 
regimen of therapy with CS and GS for 6 weeks in recurrences of chronic joint and back pain. The study enrolled 70 patients 
with generalized osteoarthritis, randomized into two equal groups, comparable in gender and age, anthropometric and clinical 
indicators, and comorbid conditions. For the treatment of patients of the 1st group the following intermittent regime was used: 
CS 2.0 ml administered the alternate days No. 20, and HS 3.0 ml administered the alternate days No. 20. Patients of the 2 nd 
group (comparison group) received a standard therapy with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as needed (until 
achieving a satisfactory pain relief).

47

РМЖ, 2018 № 4(II)НеврологияОригинальные статьи
Results: the intermittent regimen of therapy with CS and GS allowed to achieve effective pain relief in 91.4% of patients, whereas 
after NSAIDs therapy it was only 62.9%. During 6 weeks of treatment, due to CS and GS therapy the intensity of pain in the 
joints decreased by 62%, in the back by 69%, the quality of life improved by 39%, no significant adverse events were registered, 
including changes in biochemical parameters characterizing liver function and kidneys. The tendency to a decrease of the level 
of initial pain therapy is revealed.
Conclusions: the article shows the effectiveness of the intermittent regimen of therapy with CS and GS in comparison with the 
traditional pain treatment with the use of NSAIDs (as needed) in the management of relapses of chronic pain in comorbid patients. 
A more pronounced decrease in the degree of functional insufficiency and an improvement in the quality of life make it possible  
to recommend the widespread introduction of this method into clinical practice for the therapy of relapses of chronic pain.
Key words: osteoarthritis; systemic inflammation; chondroitin sulfate; glucosamine sulfate; comorbidity; joint pain; back pain; 
chronic pain.
For citation: Naumov A.V., Sharov M.N., Khovasova N.O., Prokofieva Yu.S. Results of the intermittent regimen of initial pain 
therapy with chondroitin sulfate and glucosamine sulfate for patients with osteoarthritis, back pain and comorbidity // RMJ. 