The method of biological feedback in the treatment of chronic headache and comorbid disorders
Prischepa A.V., Danilov A.B.

Sechenov University, Moscow

Currently, the search for and study of new methods for the effectiveness of non-drug treatment of pain syndromes is relevant. 
The most evidence-based approach to preventing headache is the method of biofeedback (BFB).
Aim: to evaluate the effectiveness of BFB  as a monotherapy and in combination with other methods of stress management 
program  (SM)  in  comparison  with  the  standard  drug  therapy  in  patients  with  chronic  migraine  (CM)  and  chronic  tension 
headache (CTH) based on clinical-neurological and psychological research.
Patients and Methods: 44 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (n = 22) and chronic migraine (CM) (n = 22) 
were enrolled in the study. Patients were divided into two groups. The therapeutic method in the main group was a comprehensive 
SM program, including the BFB method, relaxation techniques of self-help, lifestyle modification and thinking, art therapy; in 
the second group, patients received a standard drug therapy. The examination was carried out according to a single scheme, 
including: clinical and neurological examination, investigation of qualitative and quantitative characteristics of headache and 
its effect on vital functions (psychological examination, psychodiagnostics of stress). Additionally, the compliance of patients 
was assessed.

60

РМЖ, 2018 № 4(II)НеврологияОригинальные статьи
Results: in both treatment groups there was a statistically significant decrease in frequency (p≤0.01) and intensity of headache 
(in the stress management group p≤0.01, in the drug therapy group p≤0.05), as well as a decrease in duration of treatment, 
anxiety level and depression (p≤0,01), pain catastrophizing (p≤0,01), an increase in the WHO-5 general health index (p≤0,01). 
But  only  in  the  SM  group  there  was  a  statistically  significant  decrease  in  the  stress  level  according  to  PSM-25  (p≤0,01), 
pericranial muscle tension (p≤0,01) and tenderness in the temporomandibular joint (p≤0,05), an  increase of stress resistance 
(p≤0,01). At the same time, the effectiveness of the complex SM program directly depended on the compliance of patients: the 
use of the BFB method as a monotherapy significantly reduced the effectiveness of the treatment.
Conclusion: the use of the BFB method as a monotherapy, which primarily affects muscular spasm as one of the pathogenetic 
mechanisms of pain, seems insufficient for achieving a high-level clinical effect and requires combining with other SM methods.
Key words: biological feedback, BFB-therapy, stress, stress management, headache, temporomandibual disorder, comorbidity.
For citation: Prischepa A.V., Danilov A.B. The method of biological feedback in the treatment of chronic headache and comorbid 
disorders // RMJ. 2018. № 4(II). P. 60–65.