Clinical and pathogenetic aspects of the lesion of small nerve fibers in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus and possibility 
of their correction
A.V. Bregovskaya1, E.V. Grineva1, A.Yu. Babenko1, E.N. Zharova1, I.V. Deminskaya2

1 Almazov National Medical Research Center, Saint Petersburg
2 Municipal Polyclinic № 34, Saint Petersburg

Aim: to study the features of small nerve fibers lesion of the cornea in diabetic neuropathy (DN) in patients with type 1 diabetes 
mellitus (DM), as well as the possibility of evaluating the dynamics of the nerve fibers state with the help of confocal microscopy 
of the cornea (CMC) in the course of the DM treatment.
Patients and Methods: 40 healthy patients aged 18–45 years (the control group) were involved in the study, as well as 50 pa-
tients aged 18–45 years with type 1 DM and with clinical and/or electrophysiological (electroneuromyography, ENMG) criteria 
for sensory and/or sensorimotor form of DN.
Results and Discussion: there were significant differences in the nerve fibers structure of the cornea between the control group 
and patients with DM: the number of nerve fibers in patients with type 1 DM was reduced by 30%, the thickness of nerve fibers 
was 25% less than in healthy persons (p<0.001). When comparing the results of CMC and ENMG data, a significant negative 
correlation (p<0.005) was found between the severity of sensory deficit by the NDS scale and morphological changes of the 
corneal nerves. During evaluation of CMC and ENMG data in the course of the DN treatment with alpha-lipoic acid drugs (Thi-
octacid® 600 T, Thioctacid® HR), positive dynamics of structural changes of small nerve fibers (p<0.005) were determined, as 
well as an increase in amplitude values according to ENMG (p<0.01), however, the accuracy in the change of ENMG velocity 
parameters was not achieved.

91

РМЖ, 2018 № 11 (II)ЭндокринологияДиабетология
Conclusion: structural changes in small nerve fibers are manifested in patients with type 1 DM already at the preclinical stage 
of DN with effects enhancement as the DN severity increases, however, there is a possibility of morphological changes regres-
sion of corneal nerves in the course of early pathogenetic DN treatment. CMC is a non-invasive and objective research, it can 
serve not only for the early diagnosis of DN, but also to assess the morphological changes in the dynamics during therapy.
Key  words:  diabetes  mellitus,  diabetic  neuropathy,  confocal  microscopy  of  corneal,  alpha-lipoic  acid,  Thioctacid®  600  T,  
Thioctacid® HR.
For citation: Bregovskaya A.V., Grineva E.V., Babenko A.Yu. et al. Clinical and pathogenetic aspects of the lesion of small nerve 
fibers in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus and possibility of their correction // RMJ. 2018. № 11(II). P. 91–94.