Acetyl-L-Carnitine Supplementation and the Treatment of Depressive Symptoms: A Systematic Review  
and Meta-Analysis (summary)

Aim: deficiency of acetyl-L-carnitine (ALC) seems to play a role in the risk of developing depression, indicating a dysregulation 
of fatty acid transport across the inner membrane of mitochondria. However, data about ALC supplementation in humans are 
limited. We thus conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis investigating the effect of ALC on depressive symptoms across 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs).
Patients and Methods: a literature search in major databases, without language restriction, was undertaken from inception 
until  30  December  2016.  Eligible  studies  were  RCTs  of  ALC  alone  or  in  combination  with  antidepressant  medications,  with  
a control group taking placebo/no intervention or antidepressants.
Results: twelve RCTs (11 of which were ALC monotherapy) with a total of 791 participants (mean age 54 years,% female 65%) were 
included. Pooled data across nine RCTs (231 treated with ALC versus 216 treated with placebo and 20 no intervention) showed 
that ALC significantly reduced depressive symptoms (SMD = -1.10, 95% CI -1.65 to -0.56). In three RCTs comparing ALC versus 
antidepressants (162 for each group), ALC demonstrated similar effectiveness compared with established antidepressants in reducing 
depressive symptoms (SMD = 0.06, 95% CI -0.22 to 0.34). In these latter RCTs, the incidence of adverse effects was significantly lower 
in the ALC group than in the antidepressant group. Subgroup analyses suggested that ALC was most efficacious in older adults.
Conclusions: ALC supplementation significantly decreases depressive symptoms compared with placebo/no intervention, while 
offering a comparable effect with that of established antidepressant agents with fewer adverse effects. Future large scale trials 
are required to confirm/refute these findings.
Key words: acetyl-L-carnitine, depression, meta-analysis, antidepressants.
For citation: Acetyl-L-Carnitine Supplementation and the Treatment of Depressive Symptoms: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis (summary) // RMJ. 2018. № 4(II). P. 69–73.