Patient management with amiodarone-associated thyroid dysfunction. News of the European Thyroid Association 2018
T.Yu. Demidova, Yu.S. Kishkovich, D.O. Ladigina

Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow

Treatment with amiodarone is associated with the development of thyroid dysfunction and changes in laboratory parameters 
of its functions. There are amiodarone-induced hypothyroidism (AIH) and amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis (AIT). There are 
also mixed/undifferentiated forms. Although AIH can develop in patients with normal thyroid and absence of an autoimmune 
reaction, it most often develops in patients with latent chronic autoimmune thyroiditis, prevails in women as well as in iodine-
saturated areas.
All patients treated with amiodarone had early (<3 months) or late (>3 months) changes in serum thyroid hormone levels in 
the analyzes. The high content of iodine in amiodarone increases the inorganic iodine of the blood plasma and the excretion of 
iodine with urine. Due to the Wolff-Chaikoff effect, a thyroid gland adapts to iodine overload by suppressing the organification 
of iodine and reducing the levels of thyroid hormones. The latter effect is the main cause of an increase in serum thyrotropic 
hormone concentration.
While AIH is easily treated, AIT represents itself as the diagnostic and therapeutic difficulty. Most patients with AIT 2 (destructive 
thyroiditis) are successfully treated with glucocorticosteroids, and may not need to cancel amiodarone. Treatment of AIT 1 
(mixed/undifferentiated forms) is a much more difficult task due to the resistance of the iodine-saturated gland to antithyroid 
drugs. Taking into account the difficulties in the diagnostic differentiation between AIT 1 and mixed/undifferentiated forms, the 
combined treatment is often used.
Key  words:  thyroid  dysfunction, 
thyroidectomy, amiodarone.
For  citation:  Demidova  T.Yu.,  Kishkovich  Yu.S.,  Ladigina  D.O.  Patient  management  with  amiodarone-associated  thyroid 
dysfunction. News of the European Thyroid Association 2018 // RMJ. 2018. № 11(II). P. 101–104.