Functional asthenia in young patients: modern methods of correction
Shuteeva Т.V.

Kursk State Medical University

The  aim  of  the  study  was  to  research  the  various  clinical  manifestations  of  functional  asthenia  in  young  patients  and  the 
possibilities of using citicoline (Neupilept) to correct these manifestations.
Patients and Methods: forty patients aged from 30 to 40 years with functional asthenia were examined. Among them there 
were 14 (35%) men and 26 (65%) women. The median age was 34.4 years. Сlinical examination using questioning (complaints), 
physical and auscultatory methods; neurological examination; examination of neurocognitive status using Schulte tables, MoCA 
test; determination of the severity of anxiety-depressive disorders by HDRS and HARS; scale of asthenic state. In all patients 
the  clinical  manifestations  of  functional  asthenia  were  observed  for  about  6  months.  The  psychotraumatic  stress  preceded 
the onset of the disease in 22% of men and 56% of women, significant physical overload, improper organization of working 
conditions (irregular working hours, absence of holidays, overload at work) in 26% and 28% of cases, respectively. Patients were 
comparable in terms of level of education. The control group was represented by 15 patients with different manifestations of 
functional asthenia, comparable to the main complaints, age, and psychophysiological characteristics. Both groups of patients 
received traditional drugs — complex vitamin preparations, comparable in composition. Patients of the main group received an 
oral solution of Neupilept at 500 mg per day for 30 days.
Results: in the main group a significant reduction in asthenic complaints was detected during the treatment, as well as a marked 
decrease in anxiety-depressive symptoms, an improvement in the cognitive background. An analysis of neuropsychological 
indicators revealed a close relationship between the use of Neupilept and the regress of neurosomatic dysfunction.
Conclusion: the use of Neupilept for correcting clinical manifestations of functional asthenia improves the quality of life of patients, 
activates the processes of psychoemotional and psychophysical adaptations in conditions of mental and physical overload.
Key words: asthenia, forms of asthenia, citicoline, Neupilept.
For citation: Shuteeva Т.V. Functional asthenia in young patients: modern methods of correction // RMJ. 2018. № 4(II). P. 80–84.