The problem of non-motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease and the effect of dopaminergic therapy on their correction
Shipilova N.N., Titova N.V., Katunina E.A.

Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow

Parkinson’s disease is one of the most frequent neurodegenerative disorders, it is a multi-neurotransmitter dysfunction involving 
both  the  dopamine  system  and  nondophaminergic  mechanisms.  It  is  clinically  manifested  in  the  appearance  of  non-motor 
symptoms that occur even in the prodromal period, prior to the first motor signs, and accompany each patient until the late 
stage of the disease, having a greater influence on the quality of life than the motor manifestations of Parkinson’s disease. The 
article is devoted to the features of non-motor manifestations of Parkinson’s disease. The following non-motor manifestations 
are considered in detail: cognitive disorders, anxiety, depression, apathy, excessive daytime sleepiness, behavioral disorders 
(hypersexuality, pathological overeating, addictive shopping, game addiction, punding and dopamine dysregulation syndrome). 
Data on incidence rate, pathogenesis, clinical features, risk factors and some aspects of treatment of non-motor symptoms 
are given. Important attention is paid to the problem of impulse-compulsive disorders. The high incidence of this syndrome 
is associated with the administration of dopamine receptor agonists, as well as their combination with levodopa. The authors 
present  the  data  of  their  own  research,  devoted  to  the  incidence  rate  of  impulsive-compulsive  disorders  in  patients  with 
Parkinson’s disease, their peculiarities, as well as the effect of dopamine receptor agonists on the development of this syndrome.
Key words: Parkinson’s disease, dopamine receptor agonists, non-motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, excessive daytime 
sleepiness, cognitive impairment, anxiety, depression, apathy, impulsive-compulsive disorders.
For citation: Shipilova N.N., Titova N.V., Katunina E.A. The problem of non-motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease and the 
effect of dopaminergic therapy on their correction // RMJ. 2018. № 4(II). P. 85–90.