Multispiral computered tomography in estimation of obesity in patients with ischemic heart disease
Kokov A.N., Brel N.K., Gruzdeva O.V., Karetnikova V.N., Masenko V.L., German A.I., Kashtalap V.V., Barbarash O.L.

Scientific Research Institute of Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo

The aim of the study was to evaluate the quantitative indices of abdominal adipose tissue according to the data of multispiral 
computed tomography (MSCT) in patients with ischemic heart disease (IHD).
Patients  and  Methods:  88  patients  with  a  verified  diagnosis  of  ischemic  heart  disease  were  included  in  the  study.  The 
comparison group consisted of 32 patients without ischemic heart disease. All patients of these groups underwent MSCT 
at  the  level  of  L4-L5  lumbar  vertebrae.  In  a  transverse  section  of  1  mm  thick,  the  area  of  the  abdominal  adipose  tissue, 
as well as its visceral (VAT) and subcutaneous (SAT) components, was measured at the level of L4—5 intervertebral disc. 
The evaluation of the volume of abdominal adipose tissue and its components was carried out on a 20 mm thick transverse 
section. In addition, all the patients were calculated the body mass index and the ratio of the circumference of the waist to 
the hip circumference (WC / HC).
Results: the body mass index (BMI) in the comparison groups did not differ significantly. The group of patients with IHD showed 
significantly higher values of WC / HC than the control group. The prevalence of obesity in terms of the VAT area in the group of 
patients with IHD was 70.4%, in the comparison group — 43.8%, in terms of the VAT volume in the group of patients with IHD — 
78.4%, in the control group — 56.25% with reliable differences. The prevalence of obesity according to morphometric data 
obtained with the use of MSCT significantly exceeds the prevalence of obesity verified with the use of BMI in both groups. Using 
a volumetric index of visceral adipose tissue allows the most reliable determination of a group of patients with visceral obesity.
Conclusion:  multispiral  computed  tomography  has  been  proved  to  be  the  most  reliable  method  in  assessing  obesity,  in 
comparison with the routine anthropometric methods. The volumetric evaluation of VAT is not only as good as the quantitative 
estimation based on the VAT area, but also allows to increase the diagnostic capabilities of identifying a group of patients with 
cardiometabolic risk associated with obesity.
Key  words:  visceral  obesity,  waist  circumference,  hip  circumference,  body  mass  index,  multispiral  computed  tomography, 
cardiovascular diseases, ischemic heart disease.
For citation: Kokov A.N., Brel N.K., Gruzdeva O.V. et al. Multispiral computered tomography in estimation of obesity in patients 
with ischemic heart disease // RMJ. 2018. № 1(II). P. 99–103.