Mineral corticoid receptors antagonists: the place in the practice of a cardiologist
Zadionchenko V.S.1, Yalymov A.A.1, Shekhyan G.G.1, Shchikota A.M.1, Ivanova N.A., Terpigorev S.A.2, Kabanova T.G. 2, 
Nikishenkov A.M.2

1 A.I.Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry
2 Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute named after M.F. Vladimirskiy

The  article  presents  an  overview  of  the  main  effects  of  aldosterone.  Aldosterone  affects  the  receptors  thus  causing  an 
increase in blood pressure, sodium reabsorption, water retention and a decrease of potassium level. The possibilities of the 
use of aldosterone antagonists for the prevention and treatment of cardiovascular diseases (primary aldosteronism, arterial 
hypertension, myocardial infarction, chronic heart failure, etc.) are described in terms of evidence-based medicine. The article 
provides data of large clinical studies which prove the undoubted advantage of eplerenone, as a selective mineralocorticoid 
receptors  antagonist,  over  spironolactone.  Eplerenone  is  a  selective  mineralocorticoid  receptors  blocker  with  limited  cross 
reactivity for androgenic and progesterone receptors, so it does not significantly affect the sexual sphere, as contrasted with 
spironolactone. Eplerenone has a wide evidence base, the best safety profile, tolerability, predictable dose-dependent effect, not 
associated with liver function, so it can be recommended as a drug of choice for aldosterone blockade in patients with primary 
aldosteronism, arterial hypertension, myocardial infarction and chronic heart failure.
Key  words:  aldosterone,  mineralocorticoid  receptor  antagonist,  aldosterone  antagonist,  spironolactone,  eplerenone,  Espiro, 
arterial hypertension, heart failure, myocardial infarction.
For citation: Zadionchenko V.S., Yalymov A.A., Shekhyan G.G. et al. Mineral corticoid receptors antagonists: the place in the 
practice of a cardiologist // RMJ. 2018. № 1(II). P. 120–125.