Elderly patient with myocardial infarction complicated by heart failure. Medical therapy options for prognosis improvement 

Barbarash O.L.1.2, Kashtalap V.V.1,2, Tarasov R.S.1

1 Research Institute of complex problems of cardiovascular diseases, Kemerovo
2 Kemerovo State Medical University

Acute coronary syndromes (ACS) are the leading causes of death and disability in developed countries, including the Russian Federation.
It is known that heart failure in the acute period of myocardial infarction (MI) increases the risk of in-hospital mortality by 3-4 times and by 55% in the first
30 days after ACS. Correction of heart failure in this group of patients is mandatory and has a life-saving character. The selection of drug therapy is partic-
ularly important for the patients of "vulnerable" groups – the elderly and senile age. The article presents a clinical case as an example of real clinical prac-
tice which illustrates the situation when the available drug therapy that improves the prognosis for elderly patients with ACS is not always used by practical
doctors. This clinical case draws attention to the fact of non-use, after both the initial and repeated myocardial infarction, of the mineralocorticoid receptors
antagonists during in-hospital and outpatient therapy. The article provides an overview of the drug Eplerenone – the first and the only selective blocker of
aldosterone receptors, which is registered especifically for the treatment of heart failure after myocardial infarction, and its long-term use is associated with
the survival growth when added to a standard heart failure therapy after myocardial infarction, including elderly patients with ACS.
Key words: elderly patient, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, acute coronary syndrome, myocardial infarction, chronic heart failure, Eplerenone
For citation: Barbarash O.L., Kashtalap V.V., Tarasov R.S. Elderly patient with myocardial infarction complicated by heart failure. Medical therapy options
for prognosis improvement // RMJ. 2017. № 3. P. 147–152.