The role and place of torasemide in the clinical practice of the treatment of edema syndrome: are all the possibilities exhausted?
Eliseeva L.N., Blednova A.Yu., Oransky S.P., Bocharnikova M.I.

Kuban State Medical University, Krasnodar

The article presents an analysis of authors' own data on the study of dosages of loop diuretics in the treatment of edema syndrome in clinical practice. In ad-
dition, the presented literature review on the use of loop diuretics in various clinical situations will allow practical doctors to analyze modern principles of
the therapy of edema syndrome taking into account recommendations and clinical experience.
Aim: analysis of the frequency and spectrum of diuretics in real clinical practice, assessment of the compliance of the dosages with modern standards and
recommendations.
Patients and Methods: the results of a questionnaire survey of 482 patients (random sampling) of the therapeutic departments of hospitals on the Krasnodar
Territory were analyzed. The questionnaires included data from the clinical examination, the results of laboratory and instrumental methods. The severity
of heart failure was clarified by the questionnaire "The Scale of Clinical Condition Assessment" and the questionnaires developed by us.
Results : among the patients in the therapeutic departments of hospitals on the Krasnodar Territory, there were mostly women (60.8% mean age 56.2 ± 3.3
years), 39.2% men (mean age 60.4 ± 4.1 years) ; most of patients were middle-aged (28%) and elderly (34%) people. Cardiovascular diseases predominated
as the main and concomitant pathology, accompanied by a high level of comorbidity. Drug therapy for cardiovascular disease was generally in line with cur-
rent clinical guidelines, but the most frequently used dose of loop diuretics, in particular torasemide (5 mg to 20 mg, 11 mg / day on average) indicates a low
dose range and should be revised.
Conclusion: the frequency and nosological spectrum of torasemide are comparable with the recommendations, but the possibility of correcting the effective-
ness of therapy by increasing the dosages used is noteworthy.
Key words: loop diuretics, torasemide, chronic heart failure, edema syndrome.
For citation: Eliseeva L.N., Blednova A.Yu., Oransky S.P., Bocharnikova M.I. The role and place of torasemide in the clinical practice of the treatment of ede-
ma syndrome: are all the possibilities exhausted? // RMJ. 2017. № 20. P. 1452–1456.