Evaluation of early results of revascularization in patients with non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome with proximal 
left anterior descending coronary artery disease, including isolated and multivessel stenoses
Kolupaev A.N., Malchikova S.V.

Kirov State Medical University

Aim: to evaluate and compare the immediate results of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and aortic coronary artery 
bypass  graft  (CABG)  in  patients  with  non-ST  elevation  acute  coronary  syndrome  (NSTE-ACS)  with  proximal  left  anterior 
descending (LAD) coronary artery disease.
Patients and Methods: 103 patients with NSTE-ACS with proximal LAD coronary artery disease were included in the study 
on a prospective basis. The patients received the invasive treatment: coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) — 63 patients 
(61.2%) and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) — 40 patients (38.8%). They were divided into two groups, respectively. 
Revascularization was carried out on the basis of the Kirov Regional Clinical Hospital. Prior to invasive / operative treatment, 
the  clinical  course  of  the  disease,  comorbidity,  total  cardiovascular  risk  before  NSTE-ACS,  scores  on  scales  Euroscore  II, 
SYNTAX,  and  echocaridioscopic  parameters  were  evaluated.  The  endpoints  of  the  study  were  death,  myocardial  infarction 

19

РМЖ, 2018 № 6(I)КардиологияОригинальные статьи
associated with СABG/PCI, acute cerebrovascular accident / transient ischemic attack, postoperative complications. Endpoints 
were evaluated during the period from hospitalization to the regional vascular center until the end of the period of treatment in 
the rehabilitation center.
Results: there was no difference between the groups by sex and age. Statistically significant differences were in the SYNTAX 
scale (p <0.05), the time of surgical treatment (p <0.01). There were no statistically significant differences between the groups 
by end points (p> 0.05). When it was technically possible, in patients with isolated stenoses of the proximal LAD coronary artery 
disease of 50–80%, PCI was preferred. With stenoses from 90% or more, the decision was made based on the clinical condition 
of the patient — repeated recurrence of pain syndrome, unstable hemodynamic parameters.
Conclusions: CABG (р<0.01) is prefferable in patients with proximal LAD disease with ostial lesion of LAD, hemodynamically 
significant multivessels defeat, stenosis of trunk of left coronary artery of more than 50%, extended stenosis of LAD.
The choice of the revascularization method in this category of patients should be determined by a cardio team based on the 
application of stratification scales in the aggregate, and integrated approach.
Key words: coronary heart disease, atherosclerosis, coronary arteries, stenting, aortic coronary artery bypass graft, anterior 
descending artery, cardiovascular diseases.
For citation: Kolupaev A.N., Malchikova S.V. Evaluation of early results of revascularization in patients with non-ST elevation 
acute coronary syndrome with proximal left anterior descending coronary artery disease, including isolated and multivessel 
stenoses // RMJ. 2018. № 6(I). P. 19–24.