Obstetric care organization in the multidisciplinary hospital structure
A.S. Shkoda1, A.D. Podtetenev1, I.V. Bakhareva2, A.B. Dobrova1, K.A. Pokrovskii1, S.G. Vediashkina1, M.A. Loskutnikov1

1City Clinical Hospital No. 67, Moscow
2Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow

The article presents new opportunities for obstetric and gynecological service in a large multidisciplinary hospital — City Clinical Hospital 
No. 67. Quality improvement of the health care delivery became possible due to Moscow healthcare system modernization, handled between 
2014 and 2017. Structural reforms have made it possible to increase the economic efficiency of the medical facility, to optimize the logistical 
patient flows of the obstetric and gynecological area, and to make health care delivery more accessible and patient-oriented. A clinical case 
of a patient, hospitalized in 28–29 weeks of pregnancy in critical condition, is presented in this article. Within CT angiography, she was 
diagnosed with acute intraventricular hemorrhage in consequence of the arteriovenous malformation (AVM) rupture of the vertebrobasilar 
basin. Conservative treatment was conducted after operative delivery (cesarean section) in the Department of Neurological Resuscitation of 
the City Clinical Hospital No. 67 with the subsequent radiosurgical treatment of AVM in the N.V. Sklifosovsky Scientific Research Institute of 
First Aid. The parturient was discharged in a satisfactory condition. Comprehensive health care delivery for patients with the severe condition 
is carried out in close collaboration of all the clinical centers of the City Clinical Hospital No. 67 with the use of new medical technologies and 
multidisciplinary approach, as well as the hospital work coordination with other Moscow medical facilities.
Keywords:  obstetric  and  gynecological  service,  medical  emergencies,  intraventricular  hemorrhage,  ACVA,  arteriovenous  malformation, 
pregnancy, CT angiography, new medical technologies, patient-orientation.
For citation: Shkoda A.S., Podtetenev A.D., Bakhareva I.V. et al. Obstetric care organization in the multidisciplinary hospital structure. RMJ. 