Study of the Russian student’s attitude to genetic testing and pharmacogenetic analysis
Ya.V. Kirichuk1, S.S. Tsarkov2, A.S. Orlova1, E.V. Silina1, K.S. Kerimova3, V.A. Dadaeva4, E.S. Akarachkova5

1Sechenov University, Moscow
2Privolzhsky Research Medical University, Nizhny Novgorod
3MediSPA LLC, Moscow
4National Medical Research Center for Preventive Medicine, Moscow
5International Association for the Study and Effective Control of the Stress and Related Disorders, Moscow

Genetic testing is one of the main studies of personalized medicine with a considerable impact on diagnosis of genetic and multifactorial 
diseases. The results of pharmacogenetic analysis give an opportunity for the precise selection of drugs with optimal dosing range and time 
of administration. Nevertheless, people are not aware of the real-life implications of such studies.
Aim: to evaluate the awareness and attitude about genetic testing and its implementation of students of various (medical and non-medical 
students) educational institutions.
Patients and Methods: a total of 982 respondents — 539 and 443 medical and non-medical students, respectively, participated in a survey. 
The survey was performed in different regions of the Russian Federation and was anonymous. The questionnaire was available on the Internet 
on the basis of the Google Forms service and contained 14 questions concerning different aspects of genetic testing. All basic concepts were 
explained to the participants during the survey.
Results: it was revealed that medical students are more likely to be aware of personalized medicine (75.6%, against 49% of non-medical 
students,  p=0.0002).  A  substantial  part  (81.2%)  among  all  participants  reacted  positively  to  undergo  genetic  testing;  84.6%  expressed  a 
desire to undergo pharmacogenetic analysis; 84.1% were ready for lifestyle changes in case of a high risk of disease development. 73.1% of 

37

РМЖ, 2019 № 1(I)Клинические рекомендации и алгоритмыСмежные проблемы
the respondents were in favor of universal genetic testing. Furthermore, the majority of respondents stated that genetic testing in pregnancy 
planning (58.9%) and genetic testing of children (70.9%) are reasonable to conduct. Only 42.9% of respondents were ready to participate in 
a clinical trial of an unregistered drug in case of a relevant disease. There were no significant differences in the responses between medical 
and non-medical students.
Conclusion: obtained results showed that it is essential to continue the genetic testing development, to study bioethical aspects and to inform 
the population on its benefits.
Keywords:  personalized  medicine,  genetic  testing,  genetic  disease,  multifactorial  disease,  survey,  students,  pregnancy  planning, 
pharmacogenetic analysis, bioethics.
For citation: Kirichuk Ya.V., Tsarkov S.S., Orlova A.S. et al. Study of the Russian student’s attitude to genetic testing and pharmacogenetic 
analysis. RMJ. 2019;1(I):37–42.