Expanding possibilities to improve efficacy and safety of silicosis treatment
Shpiegel A.S., Vakurova N.V.

Samara State Medical University

Irreversible silicosis course and absence of pathogenic treatment make it particularly urgent to find new methods of pharmacotherapy. The paper provides
theoretical and practical rationale for using lymphotropic drug - Limfomiozot for silicosis prevention and treatment; Mucosa compositum - for normaliza-
tion of functional processes in bronchial mucosa- and universal antitraumatic drug Traumeel S.
Objective: To evaluate therapeutic effect of all drugs in patients with silicosis and to study protective effect in the group of patients with suspected silicosis. 
Material and Methods: The diagnosis "silicosis" was established on the basis of sanitary and hygienic characteristics of working conditions, clinical, radi-
ographic, and functional examinations in accordance with pneumoconiosis classification. Prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial was con-
ducted.
Results and discussion: Positive dynamics in subjective and objective clinical signs, indicators of respiratory function, bronchofibroscopy and histograms of
bronchial mucosa biopsies shows evidence of pharmacotherapy efficacy in patients with silicosis. Protective effect is confirmed in patients with suspected sil-
icosis. Drugs prescription reduced the risk of unfavorable outcome, that was established diagnosis in the group with suspected silicosis, treated and not treat-
ed with antihomotoxic drugs during 2 years. Appropriate treatment and prevention regimens are suggested. Treatment plan: Mucosa compositum, 2.2 ml, biw,
im, with 3 days interval. During intervals between injections alternate days with Limfomiozot, 10 drops, tid, or Traumeel, , 10 drops, tid, in 1/4 cup of water.
Preventive pharmacotherapy: Mucosa compositum, 2.2 ml (10 ampoules) biw, im, with 3 days interval 2 times a year in patients with suspected silicosis (sil-
icosis 0-1).
Key words: silicosis, prospective, randomized, placebo controlled clinical trial, Limfomiozot, Mucosa compositum, Traumeel S.
For citation: Shpiegel A.S., Vakurova N.V. Expanding possibilities to improve efficacy and safety of silicosis treatment // RMJ. 2016. № 16. P. 1065–1072.