Comparative efficacy of infectious and post-infectious cough treatment in acute respiratory infections in adults
Vershinina M.V., Khomenya A.A., Nechaeva G.I.

Omsk State Medical University

Cough is one of the most common symptoms of acute respiratory infections (ARI), manifesting and maintaining with participation of all its launchers factors
and mechanisms and is a multifactorial problem.
Objective: To estimate the efficacy of cough treatment in adults with ARI with complex drugs with different mechanisms of action. The study was open-la-
bel, comparative, randomized and included outpatients.
Material and Methods: the study included 60 patients aged 18 to 75 years, with ARI, developed between 7-14th days before the screening visit. The main in-
clusion criterion was cough, non-productive / unproductive at the time of screening, started not less than 7 days before the screening. Complex preparations.
Rengalin® and Stoptussin® were prescribed in accordance with appropriate schemes. The investigator examined the patient at least for 2 times –on the 1st
visit, at the time of enrollment, on the 2nd visit (on the 7 th (±1) day of treatment). If the doctor made the decision to continue therapy on the 2nd visit, he
appointed the 3d visit ( on 14 th (±1) day of treatment).
Results: Patients were divided into 2 groups (n=30). Group 1 was treated with Rengalin, Group 2 was treated with Stoptussin. All 60 patients visited the in-
vestigator for 2 times. 12 patients (7 –from group 1 and 5 –from group 2) had the 3d visit. Cough syndrome characteristics, clinical severity of ARI, effica-
cy and safety of the therapy are evaluated for all visits.
Discussion: Rengalin use in post-infectious cough treatment has significant therapeutic effects independently of the cough nature in shorter terms, without
adverse events, including bacterial complications due to combination of antitussive, bronchodilator and anti-inflammatory effects.
Key words: acute respiratory infections, cough, post-infectious cough, Stoptussin®, Rengalin®, post-infectious cough therapy.
For citation: Vershinina M.V., Khomenya A.A., Nechaeva G.I. Comparative efficacy of infectious and post-infectious cough treatment in acute respiratory in-
fections in adults // RMJ. 2016. № 16. P. 1073–1081.