Some aspects of treatment strategy in COPD exacerbations: causes and consequences
Berdnikova N.G.1,2; Klimova O.Yu.1, Tsiganko D.V.2, Novikov K.N.3, Maltseva N.I.2

1 I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University
2 I.M. Davidovckiy City Clinical Hospital, Moscow
3 M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a growing cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Accurate estimation of COPD prevalence is need-
ed to anticipate future social and economic burden, key risk factors, and to plan COPD prevention. The frequency of COPD exacerbations is one of the most
important factors determining patients quality of life, rate of disease progression and economic burden. Main reason for of COPD exacerbations is infection,
supporting different stages of acute and chronic inflammation. The paper describes the role of infection agents in COPD exacerbation as well as molecular
mechanisms of their influence on bronchi, ability of virus to activate and maintain chronic inflammation, oxidative stress and respiratory tract remodeling.
Systemic corticosteroids are often recommended to all patients with acute COPD exacerbations. Criteria for treatment with antibiotics are mainly an increase
in respiratory symptoms. Not all patients with acute COPD exacerbations benefit from treatment with systemic corticosteroids and antibiotics. Therefore, it
is very important to analyze criteria for systemic corticosteroids and antibiotics usage of current COPD guidelines and cinical picture of each patient.
Authors show some features of drugs for COPD exacerbations prevention. Identifying patients at risk of exacerbations and their prevention is an important clinical chal-
lenge. Numerous methods for COPD exacerbations prevention and treatment are evaluated as their effectiveness may vary significantly among patients.
Key words: COPD exacerbation, acute respiratory viral infections, influenza, antibiotic therapy, corticosteroids, prevention of COPD exacerbations.
For citation: Berdnikova N.G., Klimova O.Yu., Tsiganko D.V. et al. Some aspects of treatment strategy in COPD exacerbations: causes and consequences //
RMJ. 2016. № 16. P. 1082–1087.