Сlinical features and management of patients with primary antibody production deficiencies in Sverdlovsk region
Beltyukov E.K., Skorokhodov I.S., Vinogradov A.V., Naumova V.V.
1 Urals State Medical University, Ekaterinburg
2 Stavko Clinic, Ekaterinburg
3 The Ministry of Health of the Sverdlovsk region, Ekaterinburg
Objective: to identify the clinical features and evaluate the effectiveness of replacement therapy with standard intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIGs) in pa-
tients with primary antibody production deficiencies in the Sverdlovsk region.
Methods: The study included patients of a regional primary immunodeficiency (PID) register of the Sverdlovsk region, where 81% (n = 91) of patients has
defects in antibody production.
Results: Selective IgA deficiency is the most common form of PID in the Sverdlovsk region register (n = 48). Clinical features of selective IgA deficiency are concomi-
tant allergic diseases and infectious processes of mild to moderate course, which do not require special treatment. The other forms of primary antibody production de-
ficiencies (n = 37) in the register of the Sverdlovsk region are submitted to common variable immunodeficiency, agammaglobulinemia, hyper-IgE-syndrome.
Severe recurrent infections are characteristic for patients with these forms of PID. Chronic rhinosinusitis (n = 18), bronchiectasis (n = 18), pneumonia (n  18)
are most often detected in PID patients in the Sverdlovsk region. The majority of patients with humoral immunodeficiencies requires lifelong replacement ther-
apy with donor immunoglobulins. The frequency of relapses and exacerbations of chronic rhinosinusitis was 2,7-fold decreased in our patients receiving re-
placement therapy with standard IVIG as pathogenetic treatment (n = 19).
Conclusion: The prevalent clinical forms of PID in the regional register of Sverdlovsk region are defects in antibody production: selective IgA deficiency and common
variable immunodeficiency. The most common clinical manifestations of PID are recurrent, resistant to usual therapy, infectious diseases of respiratory system, which
require special treatment. The only and highly effective method of primary antibody production deficiencies treatment is replacement therapy with standard IVIGs.
Key words: primary immunodeficiency, antibody production deficiencies, selective IgA deficiency, common variable immunodeficiency, X-linked agamma-
globulinemia, hyper-IgE-syndrome, replacement therapy, intravenous immunoglobulins.
For citation: Beltyukov E.K., Skorokhodov I.S., Vinogradov A.V., Naumova V.V. Сlinical features and management of patients with primary antibody produc-
tion deficiencies in Sverdlovsk region // RMJ. 2016. № 16. P. 1108–1111.