Nasal obstruction: causes and methods of treatment
Radzig E.Yu.1, Zlobina N.V.2

1 Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow
2 Research Institute of Clinical Pediatrics named after Acad. Y.E.Veltischev of  Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow

Preparations of elimination-irrigation therapy (EIT) are necessarily prescribed to the patients with inflammation of the pharyngeal tonsil, which is often
found in the practice of a children's ENT doctor. 
The aim of our study was to compare the effectiveness of different concentrations of seawater solutions (isotonic and hypertonic), as well as various forms
of solution delivery (jet, shower, pipette) for washing the nasopharynx in patients with adenoiditis. The effectiveness of the use of various EIT drugs as
monotherapy of uncomplicated adenoiditis in children was also evaluated.
Patients and methods. The study included 118 patients at the age of one to six years with diagnosed adenoiditis. They were randomly divided into groups,
depending on the choice of the EIT drug («Aqualor» baby / norm / forte or saline). There was made a parallel comparison of the groups «Aqualor forte» and
«Saline solution», as well as «Aqualor baby» and «Aqualor norm». The adenoiditis symptoms were assessed in points on a visual analogue scale (VAS). The
integral indicator was calculated based on the primary data: the area under the curve for the values of symptom severity, which was calculated by the trape-
zoid method, the time between visits was taken equal to the unit. 
Results. In comparison to the saline solution, «Aqualor forte»  is more effective in reducing the hyperemia and edema of the mucous membrane, the amount
of secretion in the nasal cavity and nasopharynx.
«Aqualor norm» with the nozzle, creating a «jet» spray, reduces the adenoiditis symptoms more effectively than «Aqualor baby». A topical preparation with
antimicrobial activity was appointed to 20.3% of patients.
Conclusions. EIT drugs are effective as a monotherapy in 79.7% of patients with adenoiditis. Hypertensive solutions stop the inflammatory changes more ef-
fectively. It is most preferable to use a jet spray. EIT drugs contribute to the removal of any pathogens (viral, bacterial, fungal) from the mucous membrane
of the nasal cavity and nasopharynx, without violating its biocenosis.
Key words: elimination-irrigation therapy, adenoiditis, concentration, form of delivery, hypertonic solution, jet, biocenosis, Aqualor.
For citation: Radzig E.Yu., Zlobina N.V. Nasal obstruction: causes and methods of treatment // RMJ. 2017. № 5. P. 340–344.