Effectiveness of multicomponent topical preparations in patients with acute thrombophlebitis of the veins of the lower extremiteis
Bogachev V.Yu.1,2, Kaperiz K.A.2, Lobanov V.N.2

1 Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow
2 First Phlebological Center, Moscow

According to international and Russian recommendations, treatment of thrombophlebitis should be comprehensive and, along with compulsory compression,
include both systemic and local use of anticoagulant drugs.
The aim of the study was to evaluate the efficacy, safety and convenience of using the combined preparation Thrombless Plus gel in patients with throm-
bophlebitis of the lower extremities.
Patients and Methods: 153 compliant patients aged from 18 to 75 years with thrombophlebitis of inflows of superficial veins of the lower extremities without
a threat of spread to the deep venous system and not requiring surgical intervention were included in the study. Patients were divided into three equal
groups: in the main group Thrombless Plus was used for a local thrombophlebitis therapy, in the control groups Venolife and Troxevasin NEO gels were used.
Patients applied Thrombless Plus and comparator agents independently in the projection of the inflamed vein 2 times a day for 21 days. Comparison criteria
were presence / absence of thrombus and its length in the control vein, severity of hyperemia, pain and area of ecchymosis. Symptom evaluation was also
performed independently by the patient and the physician on a visual analogue scale. 
Results: Thrombless Plus had a significantly faster and longer analgesic effect, and, unlike comparison groups, it helped to reduce hyperemia and area of ec-
chymoses by an average of 5 cm2. The length of the thrombosed area decreased more rapidly with the use of Thrombless Plus, and the recanalization for
21 days reached 40% versus 15% and 24% in the groups of Troxevasin Neo and Venolife, respectively. 
Conclusion: The study demonstrated the high efficacy and safety of the Thrombless Plus gel, applied 2 times a day, in patients with thrombophlebitis of the
lower extremities of various genesis, which makes it possible to consider it as a drug of choice in the treatment of this frequent surgical pathology.
Key words: thrombophlebitis, lower extremity varicose vein disease, topical preparations, Thrombless Plus.
For citation: Bogachev V.Yu., Kaperiz K.A., Lobanov V.N. Effectiveness of multicomponent topical preparations in patients with acute thrombophlebitis of the
veins of the lower extremiteis // RMJ. 2017. № 28. P. 2035–2038.