Application of silver sulfatiazole in the complex treatment of purulent wounds
Katorkin S.E., Bystrov S.A., Bezborodov A.I., Nazarov R.M., Lisin O.E., Lichman L.A., Shestakov E.V.

Samara State Medical University

Aim: To evaluate the effectiveness of treatment of purulent wounds with silver sulfatiazole preparations in a surgical hospital. 
Patients and Methods: The analysis of 160 patients applied to the Samara State Medical University Clinic for the period 2016 - 2017 with purulent wounds
of soft tissues of various etiologies was carried out. Patients were monitored from the first visit to a surgeon to the discharge from the hospital. All patients
were divided into 2 groups by random sampling: group I (n = 82) included the patients with even numbers of case histories, who used silver sulfatiazole
dressings for local treatment of wounds in the postoperative period. Group II (n = 78) consisted of patients with odd numbered disease histories who used in
the postoperative period the salve dressings with antibacterial ointments on a water-soluble basis - levosin, levomecol. The following parameters were
studied in the dynamics: the wound fluid, the presence of edema and hyperemia of the tissues around the wound, the time of wound cleansing, the body's
temperature reaction, the leukocyte reaction, culture and sensitivity tests were performed on 1, 5, 10 days after the operation, terms of hospitalization.
Results: Statistically significant differences in the rate of subsidence of inflammatory phenomena in comparison groups were revealed. The data obtained
indicate a more pronounced dynamics of normalization of the temperature response, a decrease in the local inflammatory response and a leukocytosis level
in patients treated with silver sulfatiazole dressings. 
The conclusion: The use of silver sulfatiazole ointments allows to improve the results of treatment of patients with purulent soft tissue pathology and to
reduce the risk of secondary infection in comparison with traditional antibacterial ointments by bacterial contamination, and accelerating the postoperative
wound cleansing from pus and fibrin.
Key words: purulent wounds, silver sulfatiazole, wound healing ointment, bacterial contamination, salve dressings, inflammation, infected wounds 
For citation: Katorkin S.E., Bystrov S.A., Bezborodov A.I. et al. Application of silver sulfatiazole in the complex treatment of purulent wounds // RMJ. 2017.