Evaluation of the cardiovascular system of adolescent boys using treadmill-test
Pshenichnaya Ye.V., Tonkykh N.A., Dubovaya A.V.
M. Gorky Donetsk National Medical University, Ukraine

Revealing the hidden life-threatening cardiac disease – one of the most important problems of modern medicine. Reinforced exercise, stress can contribute
to the manifestation of genetic or latent current pathology. In connection with this, a survey of children before entering the schools with a high level of
physical activity should be the determining factor in maintaining their health.
Objective: to study the exercise tolerance of healthy adolescents before entering the military lyceum.
Patients and Methods: the response to physical activity was assessed by treadmill-test (TT) by Bruce protocol for 90 healthy adolescent boys aged 16-18
years. Before TT evaluated vegetative homeostasis: the initial vegetative tone largest stress index (SI), vegetative reactivity (VR), vegetative maintenance of
activity (VMA) on hemodynamic responses during orthostatic test. 
Results: in 34 (37.8%) children asimpatikotonic VR are identified. In 39 (43.3%) patients asimpatikotonic and vagus reactions were. In 35 (38.9%) children's
reaction to the physical activity was hypotonic, dystonic, hypertension. Slow recovery of heart rate recovery period was recorded in 27 (30.0%) persons,
blood pressure – in 14 (15.6%) persons. Also following cardiac arrhythmias and conduction have been identified: sinus bradycardia in 23 (25.6%) persons,
violation of intraventricular conduction – in 11 (12.2%) persons, the syndrome of early ventricular repolarization – in 9 (10.0%) pers., atrioventricular block
I st. – in 5 (7.8%) persons, which required further investigation.
Conclusions: the treadmill-test is it possible to assess the tolerance of children to physical activity (high in 100% of patients), reserve opportunities, hemo-
dynamic stress identified adaptation of the cardiovascular system (43.3% of children), a variety of cardiac arrhythmias and conduction at 31.1% examined,
which allowed to make individual recommendations for further evaluation and optimization of physical activity and choice of future profession.
Key words: treadmill-test, exercise, adaptation reserves, cardiovascular system, teenagers.
For citation: Pshenichnaya Ye.V., Tonkykh N.A., Dubovaya A.V. Evaluation of the cardiovascular system of adolescent boys using treadmill-test // RMJ. 2017.