Comparative analysis of the efficacy of selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors in outpatient surgical patients
Katorkin S.E., Bystrov S.A., Bezborodov A.I., Nazarov R.M., Lisin O.E., Lichman L.A., Shestakov E.V.
Samara State Medical University

In recent years, there has been a significant increase in outpatient surgical interventions. Pain syndrome is one of the most important factors affecting the
early rehabilitation of these patients.
Aim: to analyze the effectiveness of the use of tableted forms of Cox-2 selective inhibitors for anesthetizing outpatients in the early postoperative period.
Patients and Methods. All patients (n = 92) after low-traumatic surgical interventions were divided into 2 groups: patients of group I (n = 46) in the postop-
erative period were prescribed nimesulide (a sulfonanilide-NSAID) for pain relief; patients of group II (n = 46) were prescribed lornoxicam (an oxicam-
NSAID). The drugs were administered for five days. To assess the effectiveness of the drugs, a visual analogue pain scale (VAS, Huskisson E.C., 1974) was
used. Patients made marks on the scale 3 times a day.
Results of the study. Nimesulide had a more pronounced analgesic effect during the first 3 days after surgical intervention in comparison with lornoxicam.
Pain intensity marks were significantly lower in patients of group I than in patients of group II both at rest and movement (p = 0.02). At the same time, during
the period from 4 to 5 days, there were no significant differences in the intensity of pain in patients of groups I and II.
The conclusion. The tableted forms of NSAIDs must be used for relieving pain after the outpatient surgery. Nimesulide is an effective, quick-relief NSAID
with good tolerability, and sufficient analgesic activity in the postoperative period.
Key words: pain, postoperative pain syndrome, nimesulide, analgesia, outpatient surgery.
For citation: Katorkin S.E., Bystrov S.A., Bezborodov A.I. et al. Comparative analysis of the efficacy of selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors in outpatient
surgical patients // RMJ. 2017. № 28. P. 2053–2056.