Current Topics of Pediatric Rheumatology in Japan: Proinflammatory Cytokines as Therapeutic Targets for Kawasaki Disease, Systemic Juvenile Idio-
pathic Arthritis and Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome

Shumpei Yokota,1 KusukiNishioka,2
1 Professor in Laboratory of Pediatric Research, 
2 Dean Research Institute of Tokyo Medical School

Inflammation has often been considered to be a non-specific and preliminary responseof the biological defense systems. However, it is now accepted that in-
flammation is the physiologicalprocesses of an independent immune system called as the innate immunity closely linked to the adaptive immune system. The
key mediators of inflammation are proinflammatory cytokines, as demonstrated by multiple lines of evidence both in vitro and in vivo. Opposed to physiolog-
ical conditions, overproduced cytokines may play crucial roles in the pathological inflammatory processes such as autoimmune disorders.Thus, anti-cytokine
treatment has been developed as a therapy for rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), inflammatory bowel diseases, and so forth. We recently
completed several clinical trials of anti-cytokine treatment for children with systemic inflammatory diseases: anti-TNF-αmonoclonal antibody (infliximab)
for children with Kawasaki disease, anti-IL-6 receptor monoclonal antibody (tocilizumab) for children with 2 subtypes of JIA (poly-JIA and systemic JIA), and
anti-IL-1-βmonoclonal antibody (canakinumab) for children withcryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome (CAPS). This review summarizes the basis of in-
flammation in these chronic and systemic inflammatory diseases in childhood, clinical efficacy and tolerability of the biologic agents, and then, attempts to
determine the roles of individual proinflammatory cytokines in disease pathogenesis.
Key words: inflammation, innate immunity, IL-6, tocilizumab, TNF-alpha, infliximab, IL-1-beta, canakinumab, Kawasaki disease, systemic juvenile idiopathic
arthritis, cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome.
For citation: Shumpei Yokota, M.D. and Kusuki Nishioka, M.D. Current Topics of Pediatric Rheumatology in Japan: Proinflammatory Cytokines as Therapeutic
Targets for Kawasaki Disease, Systemic Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis and Cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome // RMJ. 2017. № 5. P. 380–386.