Updated risk stratification and risk management plan for Natalizumab-associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Khachanova N.V.1,2, Davydovskaya M.V.1,2, Evdoshenko E.P.2,3

1 Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow
2 Center of Clinical Trials and Health Technology Assessment of Moscow Department of Healthcare
3 City Clinical Hospital №31, Saint-Petersburg

Natalizumab is approved for the treatment of patients with active relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS). As a rule, the drug is recommended for pa-
tients with aggressive course of MS or in case of ineffective therapy with immunomodulating drugs of the first line. The expected benefits of treatment should
exceed the possible risks, especially with regard to the development of a serious complication in the form of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
(PML). The group with the highest risk of PML includes patients who receive natalizumab for more than 24 months, who have a seropositive JCV antibody
status, and previously received immunosuppressive therapy (IST). Studies have shown that early detection of PML and the urgent treatment of "asympto-
matic" PML (which reaches 90% according to some authors) can lead to better outcomes.
The report of the European Medical Agency in April 2016 and the issuance of a new medication guide for natalizumab served as a basis for reviewing the pre-
vious recommendations on natalizumab treatment managment plan, including MRI monitoring schedule and risk stratification algorithm. This algorithm will
allow an individualized approach to PML risk assessment in seropositive patients wishing to continue treatment with natalizumab for more than 24 months.
Key words: progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, natalizumab, JCV antibody, active multiple sclerosis.
For citation: Khachanova N.V., Davydovskaya, M.V. Evdoshenko E.P. Updated risk stratification and risk management plan for Natalizumab-associated pro-
gressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy // RMJ. 2017. № 13. P. 930–934.