The role of basic physical characteristics in the formation of dorsopathy and associated pain syndromes
Vakulenko S.V., Eeremushkin M.A., Kolyagin Yu.I., Chesnikova E.I.

Russian Scientific Center for Medical Rehabilitation and Balneology, Moscow

Introduction: The article pays special attention to the role of basic characteristics such as tone, strength, and endurance that the key posture-dependent
muscle groups have and that are involved in spinal disease development and dorsopathy-associated pain syndromes. A possibility to carry out integrated
functional evaluation of the spinal state and myofascial system is presented as well. Results of this functional assessment are used to produce dedicated per-
sonal corrigent programs. 
Aim of the study. Conducting a complex functional evaluation of the spine and myofascial system with an analysis of the dynamics of indicators in the
process of implementing personal corrigent programs using a specialized straingauge dynamometric diagnostic system. 
Patients and methods. The study involved 18 patients (13 women, 5 men) aged 18 to 60 years (mean age 40 +/- 15) with different clinical dorsopathies of
the lumbar spine.
Results. According to the data obtained, the isolated «good» back extension was noted in 61% of cases, whereas «good» flexion was noted in 50% of cases.
Only 11% of the participants of the study had «good» evaluation of the flexion / extension ratio, and 89% - the values of «bad» and «very bad.» Isolated lateral
flexion of the body to the left in 100% of cases showed «good» results; to the right - 78% «good», 16.7% - «bad», 5.2% - «very bad». The power ratio between
the right and left halves of the body was «bad» and «very bad» in total in 67.7%, «good» only in 33.3% of cases.
Conclusions. Violation of the power relationship between the muscles of the back and the abdominal press leads to an inadequate load on the lumbar spine,
as a result of which its static deformation occurs, pain syndromes develop and non-optimal motor stereotypes are formed. Objective diagnostic methods with
biological feedback and an integral assessment of the initial functional state of the muscular apparatus, as well as the ability to correctly interpret the results
obtained, allow to produce dedicated personal corrigent programs that will help to improve the effectiveness of therapy for patients with dorsopathies.
Key words: dorsopathy, muscle tone, musculoskeletal system, functional evaluation.
For citation: Vakulenko S.V., Eeremushkin M.A., Kolyagin Yu.I., Chesnikova E.I. The role of basic physical characteristics in the formation of dorsopathy and
associated pain syndromes // RMJ. 2017. № 13. P. 950–953.