Efficiency of early postoperative rehabilitation in primary total knee arthroplasty depending on methods of postoperative analgesia
Gomzhina E.A.1, Geraskov E.V.1, Ovsyankin A.V.1, Koryachkin V.A.2

1 Federal center of traumatology, orthopedics and endoprosthesis, Smolensk
2 Russian scientific research Institute of traumatology and orthopedics named after R. R. Vreden, St. Petersburg

Introduction: The article describes the features of early rehabilitation after total knee arthroplasty in patients with high volume local infiltration anesthesia
compared with traditional methods of postoperative anesthesia.
Aim of the study. To analyze the efficacy and results of early postoperative rehabilitation in patients after the operation of primary TKR, depending on
various techniques of postoperative analgesia.
Patients and methods. The study included data on the results of early postoperative rehabilitation of 102 patients aged 40 to 72 years who underwent primary
TKR for the diagnosis of grade 3 gonarthrosis. Patients were divided into 3 groups comparable in their characteristics. In 34 patients (the first group), multi-
modal analgesia (MMA) was used, in 35 operated patients (the second group) the prolonged epidural analgesia (EA) was performed, in the third group, a com-
bination of intraoperative high-volume intralesional anesthesia (HVIA) with postoperative intraarticular infusion of local anesthetic was used.
Results. In the HVIA group, the time before the first verticalization after surgery was less than in the EA and MMA groups; analysis of the parameters of the
volume of movements in the operated joint on the second day after the operation did not reveal statistically significant differences between the groups, which
indicates a satisfactory level of postoperative analgesia in the group using HVIA comparable to traditional methods. Patients with HVIA were able to walk in-
dependently with additional support at a distance of 50-100 meters earlier than the patients from two control groups, which ultimately led to an increase in
the walking distance in the early postoperative period by the time of discharge from the hospital.
Conclusions. When using the HVIA, the following were noted: adequate anesthesia without the use of NA; earlier start of post-operative rehabilitation; more
effective increase in the volume of movements in the operated joint; increase in the walking distance in the early postoperative period.
Key words: rehabilitation, anesthesia, total knee arthroplasty.
For citation: Gomzhina E.A., Geraskov E.V., Ovsyankin A.V., Koryachkin V.A. Efficiency of early postoperative rehabilitation in primary total knee arthroplasty
depending on methods of postoperative analgesia // RMJ. 2017. № 13. P. 953–956.