Azoximer bromide effect on the neutrophil extracellular traps formation
B.V. Pinegin1, Yu.A. Dagil2, N.V. Vorobieva3, M.V. Pashchenkov1

1National Research Center — Institute of Immunology Federal Medical-Biological Agency of Russia, Moscow
2 LLC “Petrovax Pharm”, Moscow
3Lomonosov Moscow State University

In  2004,  a  new  immunological  process,  consisting  of  DNA  strands  release  framed  with  cationic  proteins  and  peptides  during  neutrophil 
activation,  was  presented.  These  structures  were  called  neutrophil  extracellular  traps  (NETs).  Along  with  the  presence  of  NETs  positive 
properties, it was shown that NETs have a serious negative effect associated with their protein composition, consisting of 70% of positively 
charged histones and 20–30% of cationic proteins such as α-defensins and peptide LL-37 (which in the same manner as histones have a 
toxic effect on human tissue outside the cellular space) in relation to the infection protection. Currently, it is proved that NETs are involved in 
numerous pathological conditions, including those with respiratory infections, significantly aggravating the course of the disease.
Aim: to study the effect of azoximer bromide (under «Polyoxidonium» trade name) on the NETs formation in vitro.
Patients  and  Methods:  neutrophils  of  healthy  donors  were  isolated  by  centrifugation  in  one-step  Ficoll-Hypaque  density  gradient. 
Polyoxidonium  in  10,  100,  500,  or  1000  μg/ml  dosages  was  added  to  neutrophils  1  hour  before  the  phorbol  myristate  acetate  (PMA) 
introduction into the wells. Fluorescence microscopy was used to detect NETs. The preparations were stained with Syber Green.
Results:  a  new  effect  of  the  Polyoxidonium  drug  has  been  identified.  It  consisted  in  reducing  the  activated  neutrophils  ability  to  secrete 
macromolecular complexes including DNA, granular, nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins, and antimicrobial proteins as well, which are equally 
toxic for both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. A decrease in the NETs formation and release has made a significant contribution to the 
therapeutic and prophylactic effect of Polyoxidonium. Also, it explained its high clinical efficacy in the treatment and prevention of acute and 
chronic respiratory viral infections along with the immunomodulating and detoxifying properties.

42

РМЖ, 2019 № 1(II)Иммунный ответОт науки к практике
Conclusion: conducted researches revealed fundamentally new therapeutic properties of Polyoxidonium, namely, its ability to reduce the 
NETs formation by activated neutrophils with full preservation of its immunostimulating and detoxifying properties.
Keywords: neutrophil extracellular traps, NETosis, respiratory diseases, ARVI, human neutrophils, azoximer bromide, Polyoxidonium.
For  citation:  Pinegin  B.V.,  Dagil  Yu.A.,  Vorobieva  N.V.,  Pashchenkov  M.V.  Azoximer  bromide  effect  on  the  neutrophil  extracellular  traps 
formation. RMJ. 2019;1(II):42–46.