Possibilities of anxiety-depressive disorders treatment in patients with chronic heart failure
A.P. Baranov1, A.V. Strutynskiy1, O.Sh. Oynotkinova1, A.A. Baranova1, V.V.Trishina1, Yu.Yu. Golubev1, A.N. Kruzhalov2

1 N.I. Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, Russia
2 City Clinical Hospital No. 68, Moscow, Russia

Summary
Aim. To study the efficacy and safety of D-, L-gopantenic acid/Pantogam active in the complex treatment of congestive heart failure and coronary heart dis-
ease in patients with symptoms of anxiety-depressive disorder.
Patients and methods. 82 patients with NYHA II-III heart failure, anxiety and depression were enrolled in the study. The severity of psychological disorders
and the efficacy of 8-week therapy with Pantogam active were assessed using Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS), Hospital Anxiety and Depression
Scale (HADS), State Trait Anxiety Index (STAI), and Clinical Global Impression (CGI) Scale. The quality of life was evaluated using the Short Form 36 (SF-
36) Health Survey. Global improvement or change of psychological symptoms by CGI Scale were considered as efficacy criteria. Standard diagnostic tools,
i.e., echocardiography and 24-hour Holter monitoring, were applied as well.
Results. 8-week treatment with Pantogam active of patients with heart failure and depression greatly reduces the severity of anxiety-depressive disorders,
improves physical activity tolerance and vegetative regulation of heart rhythm, and decreases heart rate in supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias.
Conclusions. In heart failure patients, anxiety-depressive disorders are accompanied by significant disturbances of heart rhythm vegetative regulation, de-
velopment of supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias, physical activity intolerance, increased hospital admission rate, and decreased quality of life. 8-
week treatment with Pantogam active due to its bimodal action significantly improves these symptoms and the quality of life.

572

РМЖ, 2016 № 9


Кардиология

Смежные проблемы

Key words: anxiety, depression, heart failure, Pantogam active, heart rate variability.
For citation: Baranov A.P., Strutynskiy A.V., Oynotkinova O.Sh. et al. Possibilities of anxiety-depressive disorders treatment in patients with chronic heart fail-
ure // RMJ. Cardiology. 2016. № 9. P. 572–578.