Modeling the change of the forced expiratory volume 1-second in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Zhukova O.V., Konyshkina T.M.

Nizhny Novgorod State Medical Academy

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a disease characterized by impaired ventilatory function by an obstructive type, partially reversible, which
usually progresses and is associated with an increased chronic inflammatory response of the lungs to the action of pathogenic particles or gases. The main
method of diagnosis and documentation of pulmonary function changes in COPD is spirometry. The classification of COPD is based on the spirometry indices
according to the severity of obstructive ventilation disorders. 
The aim of this work was to predict the change in FEV1 in patients with COPD as a consequence of a change in the degree of severity of the disease during
10 years period.
Patients and methods: data from the ECLIPSE study (Evaluation of COPD Longitudinally to Identify Predictive Surrogate Endpoints), about the change in
FEV1 in patients suffering from COPD during the year, served as a model. Forecasting was carried out using the software MO Excel. The study included 1000
patients. They were distributed over the years, depending on the change in the value of FEV1. The results are shown in the diagrams on which the abscissa
corresponds to the number of patients with a certain level of FEV1, and the ordinate axis to the value of FEV1.
Results: in the course of the study, the changes in FEV1 were modeled and the mean, upper and lower boundary values for all COPD severity degrees were
determined.
Conclusion: as a result of the simulation, we find that in 5-6 years, patients suffering from COPD experience deterioration. In patients with the upper limit
of FEV1 values of each degree of severity, this indicator tends to the middle border, in patients with an average border, the indicator tends to the lower bor-
der. Patients with the lower limits of the value of FEV1, after 5-6 years pass into a more severe degree of COPD.
Key words: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, forced expiratory volume in the first second, change in FEV1, spirometry, disease severity, modeling, pre-
diction, time horizon.
For citation: Zhukova O.V., Konyshkina T.M. Modeling the change of the forced expiratory volume 1-second in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease // RMJ. 2017. № 18. P. 1272–1274.