The use of bismuth tricalium dicitrate preparations for the treatment of inflammatory diseases of the stomach and duodenum
Shindina T.S.1, Kropova O.E.1, Maksimov M.L.2, Shishlacheva O.V.1, Loshchinina Yu.N.3

1 Clinic №5 of the Facilities and Property Management Office under the RF President, Moscow
2 Scientific Center for Expertise of Medical Applications, Moscow
3 Treatment and Rehabilitation Center of MEDT of Russia, Moscow

Currently, despite a large number of publications, methodological recommendations for the prevention and treatment of gastroduodenal ulcer, the prevalence
rate of this pathology remains high among people of working age. Mechanisms of the formation of the disease make the doctors use not only drugs that re-
duce the level of acid production, but also have a protective and cytoprotective effect. This group of medicines includes bismuth tricalcium dicitrate. The ar-
ticle describes the results of various comparative studies on the use of bismuth tricalium dicitrate in erosive and ulcerative lesions of the stomach and duo-
denum and chronic gastritis. There are data on increasing the efficacy and overcoming the resistance of standard eradication therapy to achieve remission
and reduce the frequency of recurrence by adding tricalium dicitrate to the bismuth scheme, according to the recommendations of Maastricht-V. The article
presents the main properties (including antimicrobial ones), mechanisms of action, indications and data on the safety of the use of bismuth preparations.
Key words: bismuth tricalium dicitrate, antibiotic resistance, proton pump inhibitors, eradication, mechanism of action, bismuth subcitrate colloid, bismuth
titrate dicitrate, clinical pharmacology, bismuth preparations, antihelicobacter activity, antiulcer medication, gastroduodenal ulcer, preparations of colloidal
bismuth, eradication of H.pylori, Novobismol.
For citation: Shindina T.S., Kropova O.E., Maksimov M.L. et al. The use of bismuth tricalium dicitrate preparations for the treatment of inflammatory diseases
of the stomach and duodenum // RMJ. 2017. № 10. P. 703–706.