Clinical effectiveness of new drugs in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis with multi-drug-resistant and extensively-drug-resistant pathogen
Kildyusheva E.I.1, Egorov E.A.1, Skornyakov S.N.1, Medvinsky I.D.1, Zaletaeva G.E.1, Podgaeva V.A.2, Lugovkina T.K.2, Okhtyarkina V.V.2,
Kravchenko M.A.1, Fadina O.V.1, Schipunov S.V.1, Guschin A.C.3

1 Ural Research Institute for Phthisiopulmonology
2 Chelyabinsk Regional Clinical Antituberculosis Dispensary
3 «Pharmasyntes», Irkutsk

In the last decade, the problem of drug-resistant tuberculosis, especially with multiple drug resistance (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant (XDR) pathogen
has come to the first place in Russia after stabilization of the tuberculosis incidence rate.
Aim of the study: assessing clinical results of the inclusion of new combined dosage forms and monopreparations with anti-tuberculosis activity in the treat-
ment of tuberculosis of respiratory organs with MDR and XDR of the pathogen.
Patients and methods: the article analyzes the clinical results of additional inclusion of the following drugs into the individualized tubercular regimens (TRs):
sodium para-aminosalicylate + isoniazid (Isopask), hydroxymethylquinoxaline dioxide + isoniazid (Hixozide), thioureidoiminomethylpyridinium perchlorate
(Perchlozon®), Bedaquiline. 

1288

РМЖ, 2017 № 18


Болезни дыхательных путей

Оригинальные статьи

Results and discussion: Combined TR with additional inclusion of Isopask is evaluated as safer in comparison with PASK (p <0.005). Treatment with Per-
chlozon in combination with the 4th tubercular regimen ensured the achievement of a targeted clinical and bacteriological result in the first 90 days of
chemotherapy. However, the number of cases of concomitant (two or more) adverse events in patients treated with Perchlozon® was significantly higher in
comparison with the patients in the control group (30% and 5.5%, respectively, p <0.05). At the same time, undesirable phenomena were reversible in char-
acter, and stopped after continuation of using Perchlozon® or its cancellation. The use of Bedaquiline in the individualized 5th tubercular regimen made it pos-
sible to increase the cessation of bacterial excretion in patients with XDR from 36.6 to 59.8% (p <0.05). The prolongation of the QT interval in 1.8% of pa-
tients was the reason for Bedaquiline 's abolition. Inhalation of the combined drug Hixozide in addition to the 4th or 5th tubercular regimens provided good
clinical efficacy for bronchial tuberculosis and nonspecific endobronchitis in patients with respiratory tuberculosis. The сomplete decrement of endobronchitis
was observed in 62,5% of treated patients and in 27,3% - among the control group (p<0,05).
Key words: treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis, multiple drug resistance, extensively- drug resistance, drug safety.
For citation: Kildyusheva E.I., Egorov E.A., Skornyakov S.N. et al. Clinical effectiveness of new drugs in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis with multi-
drug-resistant and extensively-drug-resistant pathogen // RMJ. 2017. № 18. P. 1288–1295.