Improvement of transmittal blood flow and proarrhythmic markers in patients with relative coronary insufficiency during trimetazidine therapy. 
Fedulaev Yu. N.1, Andreeva O.N.1, Lomajchikov V.V.1, Babayev A.V.2, Bilich А.G.2, Rodichkina A.G.2

1 Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow
2 City Clinical Hospital №13, Moscow

Introduction. Experience in the use of trimetazidine in patients with coronary heart disease has proven its effectiveness not only by influencing the indica-
tors of pain and painless myocardial ischemia, but also by increasing exercise tolerance, as well as increasing global contractility of the left ventricle and re-
ducing arrhythmic manifestations. However, the effectiveness of cytoprotective therapy in patients with relative coronary insufficiency remains underesti-
mated.
The aim of the study was to evaluate the effect of Trimetazidine (Daredorm MV 70 mg) at a volume and speed of filling of the left ventricle, the number of
ventricular extrasystoles in patients with relative coronary insufficiency on the background of left ventricular hypertrophy.
Patients and methods. 66 patients with hypertensive disease who, according to echocardiography, had moderate left ventricular hypertrophy and fully pre-
served systolic function, and diastolic dysfunction of the left ventricle in the form of impaired relaxation and pseudonormalization was revealed in terms of
transmittal blood flow. Holter monitoring of the electrocardiogram with evaluation of proarrhythmic markers (cardiac rhythm turbulence and T wave mi-
croalternations) was performed. The basic therapy of hypertension was supplemented with a 3-month application of trimetazidine 70 mg once a day (De-
penorm MB 70 mg of CJSC "Canonpharma Production"). The control group consisted of 59 hypertensive patients with comparable parameters of myocardial

РМЖ, 2017 № 4

243


Оригинальные статьи

Кардиология

hypertrophy and left ventricular systolic function, as well as similar characteristics of transmittral blood flow. The patients took an antihypertensive thera-
py in accordance with the National Recommendations for diagnosis and treatment of patients with arterial hypertension.
Results. A strong correlation was found between the characteristics of transmittal blood flow, quantitative characteristics of ventricular extrasystole and
proarrhythmic markers in the form of turbulence of the heart rhythm and microalternations of the T wave. Doppler indices in patients with traditional ther-
apy did not change significantly.
Conclusions. The inclusion of trimetazidine (Deprenorm MG 70 mg once daily) in the treatment of hypertension led to a significant improvement in the ma-
jority of amplitude and temporal characteristics of transmittral blood flow in patients with impaired relaxation.
Key words: hypertension, myocardial hypertrophy of the left ventricle, the relative coronary insufficiency, diastolic dysfunction of the left ventricle, the heart
rate turbulence, microalternation of T wave, trimetazidine, Deprenorm MV 70 mg.
For citation: Fedulaev Yu. N., Andreeva O.N., Lomajchikov V.V. et al. Improvement of transmittal blood flow and proarrhythmic markers in patients with rel-
ative coronary insufficiency during trimetazidine therapy.  // RMJ. 2017. № 1. P. 243–246.