Clinical efficacy of magnesium orotate in the therapy of cardiovascular diseases
Shehyan G.G.1, Yalymov A.A.1, Schikota A.M.1,. Zadionchenko V.S.1, Terpigorev S.A.2, Kabanova T.G.2, Shirokova E.B.2

1 Moscow State Medical Stomatological University named after A.I.Evdokimov
2 M.F. Vladimirskiy Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute

The article describes the oral preparation of magnesium - magnesium orotate. Magnesium regulates the metabolic processes in the body, participating in the
plastic, energy and electrolyte metabolism. The magnesium deficiency in the population is found in 16-42%, which can be clinically manifested in cardiovas-
cular disorders. The article gives the definition of hypomagnesemia and describes its reasons (not only the low magnesium content in foods and drinking wa-
ter, but also the slow gastrointestinal motility in the elderly, dysbacteriosis, malabsorption syndrome, alcohol abuse, pregnancy, lactation, stress, chronic fa-
tigue syndrome, etc.). The article describes in detail the effects of magnesium ions and orotic acid, which are included into the drug Magnnerot®. The article
presents the results of multicenter randomized studies of magnesium orotate in patients with cardiovascular diseases (mitral valve prolapse, arterial hyper-
tension, myocardial infarction and heart failure, heart rhythm disturbances). The results of studies suggest that administration of magnesium orotate in ad-
dition to the basic therapy contributes to an increase in the efficiency of the treatment and improves the quality of life of the patients. Thus, the drug
Magnneroth® can be recommended to the patients with cardiac diseases.
Key words: magnesium orotate, potassium, magnesium, hypomagnesemia, connective tissue dysplasia, mitral valve prolapse, arterial hypertension, heart
failure, prolonged QT interval, myocardial
For citation: Shehyan G.G., Yalymov A.A., Schikota A.M. et al. Clinical efficacy of magnesium orotate in the therapy of cardiovascular diseases // RMJ. 2017.