Insulin pump therapy and continuous glucose monitoring: clinical experience in high-technology medical care settings
Dreval' A.V., Barsukov I.A., Shestakova T.P., Red'kin Yu.A., Dreval' О.А., Taisumova M.V., Demina A. A.
M.F. Vladimirskiy Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute, Moscow

Insulin pump therapy and continuous glucose monitoring is a progressive management strategy both for type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes requiring in-
tensive insulin therapy.
Aim: To assess clinical efficacy of active introduction of insulin pump therapy into clinical practice and to determine related issues.
Materials and methods: Data on 300 patients with diabetes who switched from insulin injections to insulin pumps were analyzed. These patients were ob-
served at the Department of therapeutic endocrinology of the Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute in 2015-2016.
Results. Total daily insulin dose reduced by, on average, 18.4% (after 6 months). The number of injections decreased by 12 to 15 times (replacement of can-
nula once every three days instead of four to five injections per a day with insulin pens). HbA1c levels reduced by 1.3% (after 6 months). In addition, the num-
ber of hypoglycemic reactions decreased as well.
Discussion: Six months after the switch to insulin pump therapy, decrease in HbA1c levels, the occurrence of hypoglycemic reactions, and insulin dosage were
demonstrated. Patients are poorly informed on insulin pump operation principles. This requires broad introduction of training materials into patient educa-
tional programs. Additional education of endocrinologists is required to get familiar with insulin pumps and continuous glucose monitoring.
Conclusions: Switch to insulin pump therapy with continuous glucose monitoring effectively improves diabetes control. In addition to direct benefits (reduced
HbA1c levels and the number of hypoglycemic reactions), this method enables the patients and health-care professionals to adopt modern medical technologies.
Key words: diabetes, insulin pump, continuous glucose monitoring, high-technology medical care, glycated hemoglobin, total daily insulin dose.
For citation: Dreval' A.V., Barsukov I.A., Shestakova T.P. et al. Insulin pump therapy and continuous glucose monitoring: clinical experience in high-technol-
ogy medical care settings // RMJ. 2017. № 1. P. 3–8.