Combination or monotherapy? Treatment of hypertension in patients with different degrees of cardiovascular complications risk
Davydova S.S.

Research Institute of Urology and Interventional Radiology named after N.A. Lopatkin - branch of National Medical Radiological Research Center, Moscow

The aim of the article is to describe clinical cases of patients with hypertension and different risks of cardiovascular complications and comorbidities. Vari-
ous approaches to the treatment of hypertension from monotherapy to a combination  therapy are discussed. A therapy with sartan (Azilsartan medoxomil)
alone and in combination with Chlorthalidone (in Edarbyclor)  showed its high efficiency in achieving target blood pressure. Correction of comorbidities is
the key to success in the treatment of patients with hypertension. 
Clinical cases. Patients aged 48 and 60 years with low and high risk of cardiovascular complications on SCORE and hypertension scale achieved the target
blood pressure numbers by administration of azilsartan medoxomil (Edarbi) and a combined drug with azilsartan medoxamil and chlorthalidone (Edarby-
clor). On the top of already administered therapy there was an improvement in the course of hypertension in a patient with low cardiovascular complications
risk. The therapy of the patient with a high cardiovascular complications risk includes both the preparation to reduce blood pressure and atorvastatin, as well
as a Constant Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) therapy for obstructive sleep apnea correction.
Conclusion. The presented clinical examples fully illustrate the choice of a physician in favor of monotherapy and combinations of drugs in the treatment of
hypertension.
Key words: arterial hypertension, monotherapy, combined treatment of arterial hypertension, sartan, azilsartan medoxomil, chlorthalidone, obstructive
sleep apnea, cardiovascular complications risk, SCORE scale.
For citation: Davydova S.S. Combination or monotherapy? Treatment of hypertension in patients with different degrees of cardiovascular complications risk
// RMJ. 2017. № 4. P. 302–306.