A clinical case of a probable infective endocarditis of the aortic valve caused by intracellular infection
Pokusaeva D.P., Anikhovskaya I.A.

Scientific-Research Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology, Moscow
Clinical Base of Scientific-Research Institute of General Pathology and Pathophysiology LLC "Clinico-Diagnostic Society", Moscow

The article describes the case of a protracted primary infective endocarditis of the native aortic valve in a 65-year-old woman under clinical observation. The
article considers the possibility of setting this diagnosis in controversial patients with atypical manifestations.The peculiarity of the case was that it proceeded
with a few symptoms, without the characteristic episodes of exacerbations in anamnesis. The patient did not present typical complaints during examination.
Laboratory tests were altered, but did not meet the criteria of infective endocarditis. The transthoracic EchoCG data concerning moderate aortic regurgita-
tion did not make the researcher or the doctor change the tactics of managing the patient. The patient received therapy against acute non-obstructive
pyelonephritis. During the observation, the development of myocarditis was noted, which was also evaluated in isolation from the changes in the aortic valve.
Only carrying out transthoracic echocardiogram in dynamics and comparing the newly obtained data with laboratory analyzes made it possible to assume
the presence of an infectious lesion of the aortic valve, and the diagnosis made by the patented method of SAIS-EIA (screening assessment of immunological
status) and micro-LAL-test helped to reveal a possible causative agent.The peculiarity of this case was also the fact that the changes on the aortic valve were
initially not correctly evaluated and the patient was long without necessary therapy.
Key words: infective endocarditis, mycoplasmal and chlamydial infections, endotoxin
For citation: Pokusaeva D.P., Anikhovskaya I.A. A clinical case of a probable infective endocarditis of the aortic valve caused by intracellular infection // RMJ.