The treatment of infertility associated with metabolic syndrome and its effect on the quality of life
Gordeeva A.Yu.1, Tkacheva M.V.2, Chilova R.A.1, Proklova G.F.1, Mazur S.I.3

1 I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University
2 Clinic «Sesil», Moscow
3 Clinic «Medeco», Moscow

Metabolic syndrome is an important social issue worldwide. Visceral obesity is associated with a complex of hormonal and metabolic disorders which result
in a myriad of conditions, i.e., oligoovulation and anovulaion, polycystic ovary syndrome, and infertility resulting from abnormal secretion of sex hormones
and endometrial hyperplasia.
Aim: To assess the effect of weight reduction on reproductive functions and the quality of life under the treatment with Reduxin (sibutramine plus micro-
crystalline cellulose).
Materials and methods: The study enrolled 150 women with metabolic syndrome, obesity, and infertility. 138 patients received Reduxin 10 to 15 mg daily
for 6 months as recommended. All examinations and treatments were standard and performed according to the principles of the studies on population gyne-
cology and endocrinology.
Results: It was demonstrated that weight reduction resulting from therapeutic and preventive measures significantly improved lipid and carbohydrate me-
tabolism parameters and blood pressure and restored ovulatory cycles. The total number of patients with visceral obesity has decreased. Body mass index
has reduced.
Conclusions: Preventive and treatment approaches to the metabolic syndrome associated with female obesity and infertility should include the development
of healthy eating principles. Keeping a food diary and analyzing eating behavior are obligatory. The algorithm should also include Reduxin (sibutramine plus
microcrystalline cellulose), an effective medication to reduce weight and to improve metabolic status.
Key words: Reduxin, sibutramine, obesity, infertility, polycystic ovary syndrome, metabolic syndrome.
For citation: Gordeeva A.Yu., Tkacheva M.V., Chilova R.A. et al. The treatment of infertility associated with metabolic syndrome and its effect on the quality
of life // RMJ. 2017. № 1. P. 41–45.