Algorithm of diagnostics and therapy of psychoemotional disorders in patients with arterial hypertension
Dadasheva M.N.1, Dadasheva K.N.1, Karavashkina E. A.2, Taranenko N.Yu.2, Gorenkov R.V.2, Kruglov V.A.1, Agafonov B.V.1

1 Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute named after M.F. Vladimirskiy
2 A.I. Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry

Diseases of the cardiovascular system have actual medical, social and economic importance. Arterial hypertension (AH) is the 
most common disease among them. AH is a risk factor for the development of cerebrovascular disease, as well as premature death.
Aim: to study the clinical features of the course and the effectiveness of correction of psychoemotional disorders in patients with 
chronic cerebral ischemia, depending on the severity and duration of hypertension.
Patients and Methods: 150 people with AH were under observation, the duration of hypertension averaged 12.0±3.6 years. The 
study included patients with a stable value of blood pressure not higher than 140/90 mm Hg, who received antihypertensive therapy.  
Patients with anxiety disorders and increased variability of blood pressure were treated with a 4-week course of anxiolytic 
therapy: Group 1 included 30 patients, who received tofisopam at a dose of 50 mg twice a day; Group 2 included 30 people, who 
received affinely purified antibodies to the brain-specific protein S-100 in release-active form (Tenoten) 1 tablet 3 times a day.
The examination algorithm included: physical and neurological examination, including 24-hour BP monitoring. A study of cog-
nitive functions was carried out. To assess the psychoemotional state, the Spielberger-Hanina anxiety scale and the Hamilton 
anxiety and depression scale were used.

9

РМЖ, 2018 № 6(I)КардиологияОригинальные статьи
Results: the main symptoms in patients with chronic cerebral ischemia on the background of AH are cognitive and psychoemotional 
disorders. These patients are characterized by anxiety, phobias, and expressed autonomic disorders. Affinely purified antibodies to the 
brain-specific protein S-100 in release-active form (Tenoten) proved to be effective for the correction of psychoemotional disorders.
Conclusion: the development of methods for treating psychoemotional disorders in AH patients seems to be an extremely im-
portant task, the earliest possible start of treatment allows stabilizing blood pressure and improving the quality of life of pa-
tients. The experience of using the preparation Tenoten shows that it has a significant anti-anxiety effect and allows to stabilize 
blood pressure and reduce the risk of complications of hypertension.
Key words: arterial hypertension, increased diurnal variability of arterial hypertension, chronic cerebral ischemia, cognitive 
disorders, psychoemotional disorders, antibodies to the brain-specific protein S-100 in release-active form.
For citation: Dadasheva M.N., Dadasheva K.N., Karavashkina E.A. et al. Algorithm of diagnostics and therapy of psychoemo-
tional disorders in patients with arterial hypertension // RMJ. 2018. № 6(I). P. 9–12.