The effect of metformin on renal functions in type 2 diabetics receiving insulin therapy
BayrashevaV.K.1,2, Babenko A.Yu.1,2, Pchelin I.Yu.3, Bayramov A.A.1, Chefu S.G.2, Shatalov I.S.4, Khudyakova N.V.3, Aref'eva A.N.2, Grineva E.N.1,2

1 V.A. Almazov North-West Federal Medical Research Centre, St. Petersburg
2 I.P. Pavlov First St. State Medical University, St. Petersburg
3 St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg
4 St. Petersburg National Research University of Information Technologies, Mechanics and Optics

Background: a number of large studies demonstrate reduced risk of macrovascular complications in patients with type 2 diabetes who receive metformin.
However, the effect of metformin on microvascular complications (in particular, diabetic nephropathy) is not so clear and requires further studies.
Aim: to assess renal function parameters in type 2 diabetes patients receiving insulin therapy who were additionally prescribed with metformin for 6 months.
Patients and methods: open-label prospective study included 46 type 2 diabetics who received insulin therapy with estimated glomerular filtration rate us-
ing creatinine (eGFRcr) of > 60/ml/min/1.73 m2 and albuminuria up to 200 mg/l. The patients were randomized to continue monotherapy with insulin or to
receive additional 1500 mg of metformin. Changes in albuminuria as well as serum eGFRcr and estimated glomerular filtration rate using cystatin C (eGFR-
cys) were evaluated after 6 months.

1334

РМЖ, 2016 № 20


Эндокринология

Results: both groups were similar for sex, age, renal function parameters, and diabetes compensation. In insulin group (n=21), no significant changes in the
parameters were detected. In metformin group (n=22), significant improvements of fasting (by 7.0%) and postprandial blood glucose levels (by 9.6%), gly-
cated hemoglobin (by 3.3%), triglycerides (by 13.4%), and total daily insulin (by 6.1%) were detected after 6 months (p < 0.05). However, these changes did
not significantly affect albumin/creatinine ratio and eGFRcys. Despite significant decrease in eGFRcr by Cockroft-Gault formula (by 4.3%, p = 0.024), these
changes in metformin group were due to the significant decrease in body mass index (r = 0.61, p = 0.0068) which is a component of Cockroft-Gault formu-
la. These changes were not observed when using more precise CKD-EPI formula for eGFRcys.
Conclusions: 1500 mg of metformin prescribed for 6 months in type 2 diabetics without severe renal failure who receive insulin therapy significantly improves
carbohydrate metabolism and metabolic parameters but does not significantly affect routine renal markers.
Key words: type 2 diabetes, metformin, insulin, diabetic nephropathy, renal function.
For citation: Bayrasheva V.K., Babenko A.Yu., Pchelin I.Yu. et al. The effect of metformin on renal functions in type 2 diabetics receiving insulin therapy // RMJ.