Hallmarks of diagnosis and treatment of xerostomia syndrome in patients with periodontal and oral mucosal diseases and diabetes mellitus type 2
Gileva O.S., Smirnova E.N., Pozdnyakova A.A., Libik T.V.
Perm State Medical University named after Academician E.A. Wagner 

Aim. To determine the role of xerostomia syndrome (XS) in dental health of patients with diabetes mellitus type 2 (DM2) with associated periodontal and oral
mucosal (OM) diseases. To prove optimal approaches to XS diagnosis and correction in complex dental treatment.
Patients and methods. Comprehensive dental examination with detailed analysis of XS frequency and severity in 286 patients with compensated DM2 was
performed. Prevalence, structure and features of clinical manifestations of periodontal and OM diseases in patients with DM2 in a comparative aspect (pres-
ence/absence of XS) were analyzed. Algorithms of complex dental treatment of DM2-associated periodontal and OM diseases were proposed. They include
original means and methods of XS correction (combination of low-intensity laser therapy (LILT) with “Matrix-2k” device and special oral moisturizer "DiaDent
Regular" (betaine + VP/VA co-polymer)). Comprehensive assessment of XS relief efficacy was conducted with modified indices of xerostomia: "The Summat-
ed Xerostomia Inventory" - XI, "The Challacombe Scale of Clinical Oral Dryness" - CSCOD, physical and chemical parameters of mixed saliva.
Results. XS of various (mainly moderately severe) intensity was diagnosed in 81.1% of patients with DM2. The presence of XS in patients with DM2 con-
tributes to more severe, clinically manifested generalized forms of periodontal diseases (mainly moderately severe periodontitis) and OM diseases (erosive-
ulcerative forms of oral lichen planus, moderately severe recurrent aphthous stomatitis, atrophic candidiasis) with acute swelling and painful, sensory
paresthesia and dysgeusia symptoms. Comprehensive individualized treatment of periodontal and OM diseases with special oral moisturizer "DiaDent Reg-
ular" led to significant (p<0.001) reduction of XS intensity. It was confirmed by subjective (index of xerostomia XI – 42.8% reduction) and objective (CSCOD
– 64.2% reduction) clinical parameters.
Conclusion. Dental examination of patients with DM2-associated oral diseases should include timely XS diagnosis, manifested in moderately severe form in
the vast majority of people. Effective treatment of periodontal and OM diseases in patients with DM2 can be provided by hygienic and treatment complexes,
including modern technologies of oral and lip border moistening with special hygienic complex “DiaDent Regular” and LILT.

1340

РМЖ, 2016 № 20


Эндокринология

Key words: diabetes mellitus, xerostomia syndrome, periodontal and oral mucosal diseases, oral moisturizing.
For citation: Gileva O.S., Smirnova E.N., Pozdnyakova A.A., Libik T.V. Hallmarks of diagnosis and treatment of xerostomia syndrome in patients with peri-
odontal and oral mucosal diseases and diabetes mellitus type 2 // RMJ. 2016. № 20. P. 1340–1345.