Evidence basis for pharmacopuncture with homeopathic medicines in dorsopathies
Agasarov L.G.1, Kuz'mina I.V.2

1 Russian Scientific Center for Medical Rehabilitation and Balneology, Moscow
2 Professional Association of Reflexotherapeutists, Moscow

Background. The paper addresses scientific basis for the mechanisms and effects of pharmacopuncture. This technique combines physical and medical ef-
fects which potentiate each other. However, therapeutic mechanisms of this method are still an enigma. In particular, potentiating effects is attempted to be
associated with subtle interaction of a point and a medicine thus opening scientific debates.
Aim. To provide additional scientific evidences for reflexology and, in particular, pharmapuncture.
Patients and methods. The study included 121 patients aged 26-52 with prolonged exacerbation of chronic vertebrogenic syndrome. All patients underwent
clinical, pathopsychological, and electrophysiological examinations. The patients were randomized into 4 groups to receive homeopathic medicine Zeel T
(Heel, Germany) or salt solution. Zeel T or salt solution (placebo) were injected intramuscularly (group I and group II, respectively) or administered into
acupuncture points (group III and group IV, respectively).
Results. Pharmacopucture with Zeel T potentiated reflex and medical effects thus providing the efficacy and therapeutic safety of the technique. When salt
solution was applied, treatment effects were unstable. Standard (intramuscular) injection of Zeel T resulted in less disease recurrences. Clinical data were
verified and enhanced with objective exam results.
Conclusions. This pioneer study with two types of placebo control provides additional evidences for reflexology and, in particular, pharmacopuncture.
Key words: dorsopathies, reflexology, pharmacopuncture, complex homeopathic medicines, somatosensory evoked potentials, thermography, rheovasography.
For  citation: Agasarov  L.G.,  Kuz'mina  I.V. Evidence  basis  for  pharmacopuncture  with  homeopathic  medicines  in  dorsopathies //  RMJ.  2016.  №  20.