The experience with Micellat-Active bioactive substance in upper limb fractures
Kapustina N.V.1, Smolenskiy A.V.2, Sutormin Yu.B.3

1 Outpatient Department No. 1of the Branch No. 1, N.N. Burdenko Main Military Clinical Hospital, Moscow
2 Russian State University of Physical Education, Sport, Youth, and Tourism, Moscow
3 State University of Management, Moscow

Bone fractures are ranked second among patients with traumas who appeal for medical aid. Their rate is 21.5%. Hand fractures are in the second place among
the fractures (up to 34% of skeleton bone fractures) while the rate of distal radius fractures is 10-33% and the rate of forearm fractures is up to 75%. Ade-
quate supply with exogenous major mineral elements which participate in bone formation (in particular, calcium) is one of the factors affecting bone regen-
eration.
Aim. To improve the outcomes of uncomplicated closed hand and forearm fracture treatment.
Patients and methods. 25 patients with uncomplicated closed hand and forearm fractures were enrolled in the study. All participants underwent clinical ex-
amination, X-ray radiography (before and after plaster immobilization), questionnaire survey using DASH (Disability of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand Out-
come Measure), goniometry, and dynamometry. Complex treatment included plaster immobilization, Micellat-Active (bioactive substance) use, therapeutic
exercises before and after the immobilization, physiotherapy, and therapeutic massage.
Results. Micellat-Active improves bone regeneration in patients with uncomplicated closed hand and forearm fractures thus providing earlier active reha-
bilitation. Complex rehabilitation using Micellat-Active provides more rapid functional recovery and reduces rehabilitation period, on average, by 33%.
Key words: upper limb, forearm, fracture, bone fractures, medical rehabilitation, bioactive substance, Micellat-Active.
For citation: Kapustina N.V., Smolenski A.V.y, Sutormin Yu.B. The experience with Micellat-Active bioactive substance in upper limb fractures // RMJ. 2016.