Computer navigation in the surgery of chronic suppurative otitis media
Ovchinnikov A.Yu., Khon E.M., Scherbakov A.Yu.

A. I. Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry

Almost any form of chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM) can be surgically treated.
The aim of the sudy is to determine the advantages of using computer navigation in the surgical treatment of patients with 
CSOM.
Patients  and  Methods:  25  patients  with  CSOM  were  treated  with  the  use  of  computer  navigation  in  2015—2017  in  the 
otorhinolaryngology department of Clinical Medical Center of A. I. Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry. 
All patients were treated by an open middle ear surgery with tympanoplasty or without it depending on the prevalence of the process.
Results: in all cases, navigation contributed to surgery, displaying residual affected air cells. It was especially useful when we 
worked with the cavities of previously operated mastoids. During our operations, the system assured a complete dissection of 
the mastoid cells affected by the pathological process, including the tegmental and synodural cells. In addition, this allowed us, 
when finding a labyrinth fistula and dural exposure, to remove the found plastic defect at once, avoiding damage to surrounding 
structures. There were no serious complications during the operations.
Conclusions: in our opinion, the greatest advantages of using computer navigation in CSOM surgery are: more careful removal 
of pathological contents, greater safety during complex manipulations, especially with the altered normal anatomy of the middle 
ear, a reduction in the number of complications due to avoidance of traumas of neurovascular structures, lower blood loss, lower 
costs due to a decrease in the number of complications and length of stay in a hospital, a decrease in the number of relapses and 
the need for repeated operations, and also improvement of functional results.
Key words: chronic suppurative otitis media, CSOM, computer navigation, navigation support, attic disease, epimesotympanitis, 
tympanoplasty.
For citation: Ovchinnikov A.Yu., Khon E.M., Scherbakov A.Yu. Computer navigation in the surgery of chronic suppurative otitis 
media // RMJ. 2018. № 3(II). P. 43–47.