The possibilities of radiological methods in evaluation of the effectiveness of the surgical stage of cochlear implantation 
(clinical and experimental study)
Ivanova I. V.1, Makarova D. V.1, Diab Khasan Mokhamad Ali2, 3, Lezhnev D. A.1

1 А. I. Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry
2 Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow
3 Scientific and Clinical Center of Otorhinolaryngology of the Federal Medico-Biological Agency of the Russian Federation

Cochlear implantation (CI) is a generally accepted method for the restoration of auditory function in persons suffering from 
sensorineural  hearing  loss  of  the  fourth  degree  and  deafness.  To  obtain  additional  information  about  positioning  of  the 
intracochlear electrode and the way of its placement, multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT) is used. Cone-beam computed 
tomography (CBCT) is considered as an alternative method of radiation research in CI.
Aim: to study the possibilities of MSCT and CBCT in assessing the position of the implant towards the inner ear structures at 
the postoperative stage of CI.
Patients and Methods: the authors made a comparative analysis of the results of MSCT / CBCT studies of 2 preparations 
of cadaveric temporal bones and the results of examination of 3 patients after unilateral CI at the age of 5 to 23 years old.  

48

РМЖ, 2018 № 3(II)ОториноларингологияАктуальная проблема
The electrode array was implanted with a transmembrane method, the length of the working part of the active electrode was 
26.4 mm with 12/20 stimulation channels. The distance between the electrode contacts was 0.7 / 2.4 mm. MSCT was performed 
on the apparatus Brilliance 64 (Philips, USA), CBCT was performed on a cone-beam computer tomograph NewTom 5G (QR s. 
r.l., Italy).
Results: the capabilities of CBCT and MSCT in assessing the position of the active electrode towards the structures of the inner 
ear are equivalent, and the oblique coronary reconstruction proved to be a reliable and easy-to-use technique for confirming the 
intracochlear position of the electrode array.
Conclusion:  radiological  methods  of  examination  in  the  postoperative  period  should  be  used  not  only  to  determine  the 
intracochlear position of the electrode system, but also the correlation between the location of the electrode array and the 
results of the audiological perception. The criteria of image analysis proposed in the work will allow to unify the evaluation 
report of the visualized picture, which, in turn, makes it possible to assess the quality of CI.
Key words: multislice computed tomography; cone- beam computed tomography; cochlear implantation; criteria; surgery.
For citation: Ivanova I. V., Makarova D. V., Diab Khasan Mokhamad Ali, Lezhnev D. A. The possibilities of radiological methods 
in evaluation of the effectiveness of the surgical stage of cochlear implantation (clinical and experimental study) // RMJ. 2018. 