The use of antiseptics in otorhinolaryngology
Kryukov A.I., Kunelskaya N.L., Tsarapkin G.Yu., Tovmasyan A.S.
Scientific Research Clinical Institute of Otorhinolaryngology named after L.I. Sverzhevskiy, Moscow

The  problem  of  local  diseases  caused  by  bacterial  pathogens  is  relevant  for  medicine  in  general,  but  it  acquires  special 
significance  for  medical  specialties,  where  the  main  nosological  forms  are  represented  by  purulent-inflammatory  diseases. 
One of these specialties, in particular, is otorhinolaryngology. Despite the large number of medicines and the use of modern 
technologies, the lethality from the developed generalized septic complications remains high. Acute respiratory viral infections 
(ARVI) are the most frequent pathology and occupy one of the leading positions in the structure of the overall morbidity. The 
incidence of these infections remains at a high level, acquiring epidemic proportions during periods of seasonal diseases. As for 
the treatment of the majority of acute respiratory viral infections, the use of antibiotics is not required, excessive use should be 
avoided, and antiseptic drugs may be an effective option of the therapy.
The  role  of  the  infectious  agent  in  the  development  of  purulent-septic  infections  is  very  important,  since  it  is  known,  that 
specificity of the infectious process and morphological changes in the organs depend the type of microorganism, causing the 
disease. In recent years some new antiseptic preparations have appeared, that provides the possibility of the most effective local 
antibacterial therapty in otorhinolaryngological practice. The article is devoted to the description of the preparation Betadine®. 
It is a broad-spectrum antiseptic drug with bactericidal, sporicidal and antiviral properties.
Key words: antiseptics, Betadine, otorhinolaryngology, ARVI.
For citation: Kryukov A.I., Kunelskaya N.L., Tsarapkin G.Yu., Tovmasyan A.S. The use of antiseptics in otorhinolaryngology //  
RMJ. 2018. № 3(II). P. 78–81.