Modern therapy of chronic venous disorders of the lower limbs: transdermal phlebotropic medications in focus
V.Yu. Bogachev, B.V. Boldin, P.Yu. Turkin

Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow

Aim: to evaluate the efficacy and safety of an application of the drug Detragel.
Patients and Methods: 1734 patients were included in the study (mean age 50.6±15.7 years) with various stages and 
forms of chronic venous disorders of the lower limbs (CVDLL), accompanied by venospecific symptoms: a sense of heavi-
ness and fatigue in the legs, pain, swelling and nocturnal cramps. All patients used Detragel daily for 14 days. Permitted 
therapy  included  Detralex,  acetylsalicylic  acid,  compression  therapy.  The  severity  of  each  of  the  CVDLL  venospecific 
symptoms was assessed in points (0 points — absence, 3 points — maximum severity) initially and 14 days after the start 
of therapy. Satisfaction with the results of treatment of the patient and the physician and the frequency of adverse events 
were also assessed.
Results:  Detragel  monotherapy  was  used  by  58%  of  patients,  in  the  remaining  cases,  the  combination  of  Detragel  + 
Detralex (1000 mg/day) was recommended. Patients were statistically significantly younger in the monotherapy group than 
in the combination therapy group (p<0.001). Also in the monotherapy group, there was a significantly higher percentage 
of patients younger than 40 years of age with CVDLL of C0s and C1 clinical classes according to CEAP and a significantly 
lower percentage of patients older than 65 years with more severe forms of CVDLL than in the combination therapy group. 
Compression  therapy  was  recommended  for  4.5%  of  patients  in  the  Detragel  group  and  for  21.5%  of  patients  receiving 
comprehensive treatment (p<0.0001). Acetylsalicylic acid was prescribed in 0.7% and 6.8% of cases in the Detragel and De-

61

РМЖ, 2018 № 6 (II)Ангиология/ГемостазОригинальные статьи
tragel+Detralex groups, respectively (p<0.0001). A significant decrease in the severity of venospecific symptoms was noted 
in patients who received Detragel in both monotherapy and comprehensive therapy. 86.5% of patients and 89.9% of physi-
cians characterized treatment as good and excellent, respectively. 2 (0.12%) patients noted minor skin reactions.
Conclusion: Detragel is an effective and safe drug for the treatment of patients with various clinical classes of CVDLL according 
to the CEAP classification.
Key words: chronic venous disorders, Detragel, liposomes, essential phospholipids, topical medications.
For citation: Bogachev V.Yu., Boldin B.V., Turkin P.Yu. Modern therapy of chronic venous disorders of the lower limbs: transdermal 
phlebotropic medications in focus // RMJ. 2018. № 6(II). P. 61–65.