Lumbar dorsopathy: complex management
L.G. Agasarov1, A.A. Mar'yanovskiy2, A.S. Kaluga1

1 Russian Scientific Center of Rehabilitation and Resort Medicine, Moscow
2 Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow

Background. Dorsopathy is one of the most common diseases affecting high percentage of working population. This paper presents the results of the study
of 80 patients with various treatment regimens. Complex reflex-medical approach (the combination of pharmacopuncture and classical acupuncture) provides
optimal treatment outcome in patients with lumbar dorsopathy with neurological symptoms.
Purpose. To develop scientific and methodological support of pathogenetic reflex-medical technology in patients with lumbar dorsopathy using the combi-
nation of corrective methods.
Material and methods. The study included 80 patients (43 women and 37 males) with lumbar dorsopathy at the stage of prolonged exacerbation with neu-
rological symptoms and clinical syndromes formation. Three study groups and one control group included 20 patients each. Group I received one course of
classical acupuncture in conjunction with pharmacopuncture (Discus compositum, Traumeel S, Lymphomyosot). Group II received one course of classical
acupuncture and Group III - pharmacopuncture (Discus compositum, Traumeel S , Lymphomyosot). The course included 10 procedures. The control group re-
ceived NSAIDs, muscle relaxants, physiotherapy.
Results. The most significant positive dynamics was observed in Group I with combination of 2 methods. Assessment of paravertebral muscles defense and
dynamics of lumbar motion limits showed positive dynamics in all groups. The most significant improvement was observed in Group I. Dynamics in the con-
trol group was less clinically significant.
Conclusions. The developed program of combined use of classical acupuncture and pharmacopuncture with complex preparations has significant therapeu-
tic effect, that enhances the total therapeutic efficacy and improves the quality of life.
Keywords: dorsopathies, lumbar pain, pharmacopuncture, classical acupuncture, complex preparations, Discus compositum, Traumeel S, Lymphomyosot
For citation: Agasarov L.G., Mar'yanovskiy A.A., Kaluga A.S. Lumbar dorsopathy: complex management // RMJ. 2016. № 13. P. 843–846.