Antihomotoxic therapy in rehabilitation of patients with chronic non-specific back pain
Komleva N.E.1, Mar'yanovskiy A.A.2, Danilov A.N.1

1 Saratov Research Institute of Rural Hygiene
2 Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow

Background. The paper presents the results of studies conducted to evaluate the efficacy of improved regenerative medicine methods in patients with verte-
bro-neurological diseases of lumbosacral spine. The study showed high therapeutic efficacy of proposed rehabilitation method, that was confirmed by neu-
rological symptoms regression and analgesic effect.
Purpose. To evaluate the efficacy of antihomotoxic therapy in rehabilitation of patients with chronic non-specific low back pain (LBP).
Material and methods. The study included 122 patients aged 23 to 67 years with chronic non-specific LBP. Group I (n=54) received standard therapy
(NSAIDs, muscle relaxants, B vitamins, physiotherapy). Group II (n=68) received only pharmacopuncture (Placenta compositum, Coenzyme compositum and
Ubichinon compositum), and analgesic drugs were given on demand. The frequency of clinical symptoms and quality of life before and after treatment (day
30-31) were used as diagnostic criteria. Statistical analysis was performed with Statistica 6,0., using nonparametric, Kruskal-Wallis and chi-squared tests,
Mann — Whitney U-test, confidence interval (CI) evaluation.
Results. Statistically significant difference of pain syndrome coefficient was revealed on Day 30-31. Pain dynamics analysis showed that pharmacopunc-
ture provided strong analgesic effect in the study group in comparison with control group.
Conclusions. Statistically significant difference of pain syndrome coefficient was revealed on Day 30-31 in Groups I and II, that confirmed the different ther-
apeutic efficacy of treatment methods.
Key words: vertebroneurology, rehabilitation treatment, manual therapy, pharmacopuncture.
For citation: Komleva N.E., Mar'yanovskiy A.A., Danilov A.N. Antihomotoxic therapy in rehabilitation of patients with chronic non-specific back pain // RMJ.