Local periarticular therapy with tenoxicam in knee osteoarthritis
I.R. Gafarov1, F.S. Musina1, S. Yu. Glazunov2

1Health and Social Development Institute of Professional Education, Ufa
2Republican Clinical Hospital named after G.G. Kuvatov, Ufa

Knee osteoarthritis (OA) is an interdisciplinary problem at the junction of Rheumatology, as well as Traumatology and Orthopedics, which 
significantly leads to a decrease in the quality of life and pronounced articular syndrome.
Aim: to assess the possibilities of local periarticular therapy application with Artoxan (tenoxicam) during the inflammation acute phase of the 
knee joint.
Patients and Methods: in open observational prospective study, the efficacy and safety results were analyzed in local periarticular therapy 
application with Artoxan (tenoxicam) from the thienothiazine derivative of the oxicam group. This non­steroidal anti­inflammatory drug was 
prescribed to 43 female patients aged 50 to 55 years with stage II knee OA (according to Kellgren­Lawrence), which were ranged into two 
equivalent groups: group 1 (n=20) — intramuscular injection with Artoxan (tenoxicam), group 2 (n=23) — local periarticular administration 
with Artoxan (tenoxicam).
Results: pain reduction resulting from the therapeutic effect was noted in both groups, but the VAS parameter during movement showed the 
best dynamics in the 2nd group. A significant improvement in the WOMAC Osteoarthritis Index was observed by the third visit in the 2nd 
group, receiving local therapy with Artoxan (p=0.042). According to the goniometry results by the 2nd and 3rd visits, patients of the 2nd group 
demonstrated greater movement amplitude in the knee joint compared with that in patients of the 1st group (p=0.048). Response rate analysis 
to therapy according to the OARSI criterion showed a positive response in 17 (85%) patients of the 1st group. The drug showed an excellent 
result in 21 (91%) patients of the 2nd group.
Conclusion: obtained results in Artoxan (tenoxicam) administration for local periarticular therapy significantly improved the quality of life, 
reduced the pain in the knee joint with a good safety and efficacy profile, and optimized the treatment duration for patients with OA.
Keywords: osteoarthritis, pharmacotherapy, quality of life, thienothiazine derivative of the oxicam group, tenoxicam, Artoxan.
For  citation:  Gafarov  I.R.,  Musina  F.S.,  Glazunov  S.Yu.  Local  periarticular  therapy  with  tenoxicam  in  knee  osteoarthritis.  RMJ.  