Modulation of anticonvulsants effects with micronutrients in experimental setup
O.A. Gromova, A.G. Kalacheva, T.R. Grishina, T.E. Bogacheva, V.I. Demidov

Ivanovo State Medical Academy

Background. Convulsive disorders can affect nervous and psychological development and transform into epileptic syndromes. Search for anticonvulsants
with mild adverse effects has led to identification of micronutrients' promising ability to potentiate anticonvulsants action.

874

РМЖ, 2016 № 13


Неврология

От науки к практике

Purpose. To study neurotropic effects of myo-inositol and folic acid in experimental setup.
Material and methods. The study included 42 white male rats (weight 200-300 g). Rats were divided into 7 groups with different treatment regimens (first
control group, others were administered either monotherapy or combination of drugs). The efficacy of combination of inositol and folic acid (inositol + FA)
for 18 days or gabapentin 90 minutes before convulsions reproduction or sodium valproate for 4 days was evaluated. Convulsions model was reproduced by
intraperitoneal administration of thiosemicarbazide. After simultaneous decapitation, blood samples were collected. Myo-inositol's plasma level was mea-
sured on 18th day with microbiological method. Histopathological study of brain was performed. Statistical analysis was conducted using Statistica6,0.
Results. Inositol + FA administration significantly increased the latency time to first seizure attack and reduced seizures severity, as well as preserved and
significantly increased inositol plasma level in animals treated with gabapentin and sodium valproate. Combination of inositol + FA and gabapentin signifi-
cantly reduced seizures severity compared with control. Combination of inositol + FA and sodium valproate significantly increased the latency time to first
seizure attack compared with control, valproate group and inositol + FA monotherapy group. Inositol + FA also provided neuroprotective effect on cerebral
cortex cells in convulsions-induced ischemia, ensuring the safety of neurocytes cytoplasmic organelles.
Conclusion. Thus, inositol + FA modulates effects of drugs with spasmodic and anticonvulsant action.
Keywords: convulsions, inositol, folic acid, gabapentin, sodium valproatе.
For citation: Gromova O.A., Kalacheva A.G., Grishina T.R. et al. Modulation of anticonvulsants effects with micronutrients in experimental setup // RMJ. 2016.