Impact of stress to aviation experts alacrity to meet professional action
S.V. Gornov1, A.M. Schegol'kov1, V.B. Titov2, V.V. Gornov3, A.A. Ovinnikov4

1 Branch of the Military Medical Academy named after S.M. Kirov, Moscow
2 Peter the Great Military Academy, Moscow
3 Military Medical Academy named after S.M. Kirov, St. Petersburg
4 Branch №1 of the Main Military Clinical Hospital named after N.N. Burdenko, Moscow

Background. The paper describes diagnostic methods of functional and psycho-physiological state of aviation experts organisms based on dynamic regis-
tration of induced conductivity in skin biologically active points (BAP). First time R. Voll's dynamic diagnostics is used to evaluate systemoquant of aviation

880

РМЖ, 2016 № 13


Неврология

От науки к практике

specialist's vital activity. Observation of systemoquant of human vital activity (discrete segments of mental and behavioral activities from the need to its sat-
isfaction) creates conditions for assessment of aviation experts alacrity to meet professional action. 
Authors propose the method of psychophysiological diagnostics of aviation expert's functional state and prospect the application of psychophysiological sup-
port of these specialists. The main features of the proposed methodological approach is the objective assessment of intellectual forms of action based on psy-
chophysiological diagnosis of energy-informational (acupuncture) human system; observing effects of subjective experiences and attitudes in experts behav-
ior on body's functioning in order to control functional reserves consumption in the process of professional activities. The proposed method of conditions mod-
eling, which leads to a different level of professional abilities formation, is the result of generalization of numerous observations of aviation experts actions.
Objective. To explore the possibility of psycho-physiological alacrity assessment in order to maintain expert's professional longevity and to justify the pos-
sibility of correcting aviation expert's functional state as the way of crew's psycho-physiological support.
Material and methods. The study involved 40 aviation experts of the state aviation aged 25-39 years. In terms of the study aviation expert was proposed to
imagine with closed eyes the whole flight, previously held in stress conditions, objectively analyzed with systemoquant of vital activity.
Results. BAP of acupuncture meridian system, corresponding the values of internal organs and systems functioning on the background of the flight image,
were decreased in the group of experts, who experienced the stress.
Conclusions. Possibility to register systemoquant of vital activity, corresponding body's functional systems, let to assess health state of aviation expert, who
experienced stress factors, and his alacrity to meet professional action.
Keywords: aviation experts, systemoquant of vital activity⎫alacrity to meet professional action, R. Voll's dynamic diagnostics, biologically active point, func-
tional system.
For citation: Gornov S.V., Schegol'kov A.M., Titov V.B. et al. Impact of stress to aviation experts alacrity to meet professional action // RMJ.  2016. № 13. P. 880–883.