Plasma taurine and diabetes genetic predisposition effects on insulin sensitivity change in response to very-low-calorie diet (report)

Aim:  to  assess  the  relationship  between  the  plasma  taurine  level  and  decreased  insulin  resistance  when  changing  diet  in  POUNDS  Lost 
(Preventing Overweight Using Novel Dietary Strategies) study subjects. Adding that, to analyze the taurine modifying effect on type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (DM 2) genetic predisposition.
Patients and Methods: 811 overweight or obese subjects were randomized on the basis of 4 diets with different fat, protein, and carbohydrate 
levels: group 1 — 20%, 15% and 65%; group 2 — 20%, 25% and 55%; group 3 — 40%, 15% and 45%; group 4 — 40%, 25% and 35% respectively. 
Body  weight,  waist  circumference,  and  fasting  glucose  were  measured  in  the  morning  before  breakfast  at  baseline,  after  6  months  and 
after 2 years. Insulin resistance was estimated by homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA­IR), insulin secretion — by 
homeostasis model assessment of b­cell function (HOMA­B). Genetic data and results of plasma taurine level were analyzed in 711 subjects.
Results:  in  subjects  with  DM  2  genetic  risk  score  (GRS)  across  the  lowest  tertile,  the  baseline  taurine  level  was  associated  with  a  less 
pronounced decrease in fasting glucose and HOMA­IR (p=0.02). Whereas, a more pronounced decrease in insulin and HOMA­IR (p=0.04) 
was associated in subjects with baseline taurine level across the highest tertile. Among the subjects with the baseline taurine level across the 
lowest and medium tertile, the relationship between DM 2 GRS and a decrease in insulin resistance statistically significantly changed over 
2 years (p=0.05). Across the highest tertile — statistically significantly did not change over 2 years (p=0.26).
Conclusion: depending on the existing genetic background and the baseline taurine level, very­low­calorie diet can have a beneficial effect 
on insulin resistance of varying severity.
Keywords: diabetes mellitus, insulin, glucose, insulin resistance, low­calorie diet, taurine, Dibicor.
For citation:  Plasma taurine and diabetes genetic predisposition effects on insulin sensitivity change in response to very­low­calorie diet 
(report). RMJ. 2019;4:44–49.