Preparations of high-molecular-weight polyethylene glycol: correcting the concept of 
functional diseases of gastrointestinal tract and meeting Rome IV criteria 

Kukes V.G.1,2, Smolyarchuk E.A.2, Kurguzova D.O.2, Serebrova S.Yu.1,2, Prokofiev A.B.1,2, Zhuravleva M.V.1,2, Rumyantsev N.A.1,2, Belyakova G.A.2

1 Scientific Center for Expertise of Medical Products, Moscow
2 I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University

High-molecular weight polyethylene glycol (PEG) drugs are successfully used to treat diseases accompanied by constipation. Rome Diagnostic Criteria is cur-
rently the 'Gold Standard' for the Functional Intestinal Disorders. Criteria were developed and systematically updated by the international working group on
functional pathology of the digestive system. Just over three months ago at the annual professional conference the updated Rome IV diagnostic criteria for
functional gastrointestinal disorders were officially presented to the international gastroenterology community. The paper addresses the key changes in such
sections as «Functional Constipation (FC)» and «Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)», as well as compares PEG-drugs with other laxatives. Information on Lava-
col© (JSC Moscow Pharmaceutical Factory, Russia) which contains the active ingredient macrogol (PEG) 4000 was provided as well. The present report high-
lights the main results of comparative clinical trial «Open-label randomized comparative post-registered clinical trial of the effectiveness and safety a course
of treatment with Lavacol© 12 g, powder for oral solution (JSC Moscow Pharmaceutical Factory, Russia) compared with Forlax© 10 g, powder for oral solu-
tion (Beaufour Ipsen Industrie, France) in patients with IBS and FC». According to the outcomes of the visual analog scale (VAS), frequency of defecation, con-

РМЖ, 2016 № 17

1161


Актуальная проблема

Гастроэнтерология

stipation syndrome of the GSRS (Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale), stool type evaluated with Bristol stool scale, Lavacol© 12 g administration is proved
to be as efficient as Forlax© 10 g. As this trial was carried out prior to the release of updated and revised Rome IV diagnostic criteria, we also analyzed and
validated findings and data in accordance with updated criteria. Study results showed that Lavacol© 12-24 g, and Forlax© 10-20 g were equally effective and
safe for the treatment of chronic constipation in patients with IBS and FC.
Key words: Functional Constipation, Irritable bowel syndrome, Lavacol, Forlax.
For citation: Kukes V.G., Smolyarchuk E.A., Kurguzova D.O. et al. Preparations of high-molecular-weight polyethylene glycol: correcting the concept of func-
tional diseases of gastrointestinal tract and meeting Rome IV criteria // RMJ. 2016. № 17. P. 1161–1166.