Assessment of the Candida spp. composition isolated from various biotopes and their sensitivity to antifungal drugs
V.V. Novikova1, S.G. Ezov2

1Perm State Pharmaceutical Academy
2LLC “Laboratory Technologies”, Perm

Fungal infection problem continues to be relevant for many decades, especially when manifested in the setting of various immunodeficiency 
conditions. A resistance development to antimycotic drugs is a natural phenomenon that occurs during the fungi population interaction with 
antifungal drugs.
Aim: to study the etiological structure of infections caused by Candida spp. according to data for 2017, and to analyze the isolated strains’ 
sensitivity indicators to the most frequently used antimycotics.
Patients and Methods: the patients’ bio­substrates from Perm multidisciplinary clinics were studied concerning the Candida spp. isolation. 
Chromogenic  agar  was  used  for  Candida  spp.  differentiation  (HiMedia  Laboratories).  The  disc­diffusion  method  was  used  to  assess  the 
sensitivity of the fungal isolated strains.
Results: most of the isolated Candida genus representatives (71.3%) were not typed to the species. C. albicans isolates (22,2%) prevailed 
among typed pathogens, whereas С. krusei, C. glabrata and C. tropicalis were isolated in 5.0%, 1.4% and 0.1% of cases, respectively. 
It  was  revealed  that  commonly  resistance  was  concentrated  on  ketoconazole  and  fluconazole  (30.8–100.0%  and  52.9–100.0%  of 
strains, respectively). When analyzing the isolated strains’ resistance, it was also noted that C. albicans and C. glabrata isolates from 
the upper respiratory tract (URT) had a slightly higher resistance to the studied antimycotics, whereas there was more resistance in 
C. krusei isolates from the urinary tract. Thus, high sensitivity identification of these С. krusei strains to clotrimazole is an important 
practical point.

РМЖ, 2019 № 4

67


Conclusion: C. albicans isolates’ prevalence was revealed regardless of the biological material. It was also established that there was a high 
resistance in the isolated strains to imidazole and triazole derivatives. The results revealed that there was a high isolation frequency of strains 
that did not undergo species identification and, as a consequence, sensitivity determination to antifungal drugs, which led to the empirical 
prescription of antimycotics.
Keywords: fungal infections, Candida spp, Candida albicans, etiology, resistance, antimycotics, clotrimazole.
For  citation:  Novikova  V.V.,  Ezov  S.G.  Assessment  of  the  Candida  spp.  composition  isolated  from  various  biotopes  and  their  sensitivity  
to antifungal drugs. RMJ. 2019;4:67–71.