Clinical effectiveness and tolerability of Tonsilgon®N in the treatment of recurrent upper respiratory tract infections in children: a non-interventional
study in Russia
Vavilova V.P. 1, Abramov-Sommariva Dimitri 2, Steindl Hubert 2, Wonnemann Meinolf 2, Ryzhova E.G. 3, Rusova T.V. 4, Lebedenko A.A. 5, Kolchenko I.I. 6

1Clinic of Modern Medical Technologies LLC, Kemerovo
2Bionorica SE, Neumarkt O.Pf., Germany
3Pediatric Municipal Policlinic No.1, Elf Medical Company LLC, Vladimir 
4Municipal Policlinic Sosnevo, Ivanovo
5Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don 
6Bionorica LLC, Moscow

350

РМЖ, 2017 № 5


Педиатрия

Оториноларингология

Background: Acute upper respiratory tract infections (ARI) in children are quite common and often recurrent. Overuse of antibiotics must be avoided, and
thus herbal remedies are a useful therapeutic option. 
The aim of this observational study was to demonstrate the effectiveness and tolerability of the herbal combination preparation Tonsilgon® N in Russian
children aged 2–11 years in routine practice.
Patients and Methods: In a prospective, non-interventional study a total of 518 paediatric patients (boys and girls) with ARI were enrolled at 14 study sites
in Russia (2013 - 2014). Patients must have had at least two episodes of ARI in the last 6 months prior to enrolment (day 1 = visit 1). Tonsilgon® N was given
as coated tablets or oral drops in age-corresponding dosages. Treatment duration was approximately 14 days (day 15 = visit 2) with a subsequent 30-day
follow-up period (to day 45). The effectiveness of the therapy was assessed on the basis of objective and subjective symptoms and responder rate. Further
study parameters included time to symptom resolution, treatment compliance and concomitant medication intake. Adverse drug reactions were recorded to
assess the tolerability.
Results: Patient distribution by age and gender was similar in both age groups (2–5; 6–11 years). The three most common inclusion diagnoses were nasop-
haryngitis, pharyngitis or tonsillitis. For these indications, the objective symptoms hyperemic mucosa and swollen tonsils nearly completely disappeared by
visit 2 (range of relief: 93.4 % to 97.9 % of patients). Most subjective symptoms resolved within 4 days compared to 7 days in previous ARIs. Overall, a 3-day-
shorter time to symptom resolution was achieved. 99.5 % of the patients were treatment responders, and 97 % tolerated the herbal medicine well or very well.
Treatment compliance was very good (88.2 %).
Conclusions: Tonsilgon® N is a safe and effective treatment of acute upper respiratory tract infections in young children (aged 2–11 years) and is likely to
reduce the duration of symptoms of ARI.
Key words: Acute upper respiratory tract infections, Children, Effectiveness, Non-interventional study, Herbal medicine, Tolerability, Phytotherapy, Recurrent
infections.
For citation: Vavilova V.P., Abramov-Sommariva D., Steindl H. et al. Clinical effectiveness and tolerability of Tonsilgon®N in the treatment of recurrent upper
respiratory tract infections in children: a non-interventional study in Russia // RMJ. 2017. № 5. P. 350–358.