Correction of dysbiotic disorders developing in acute enteric infections in children
Ruzhentsova T.A., Ploskireva A.A., Gorelov A.V.

Central Research Institute of Epidemiology, Moscow

The article presents data on the development of dysbiotic disorders in acute enteric infections (AEI) of various etiologies in children. The consequences and
methods of correction of AEI are considered. Particular attention is paid to the constituent components and mechanisms of action of metabiotics. The results
of the own open randomized study are presented.
The aim is to determine the efficacy and safety of the appointment of Hylak forte in children of early and preschool age, and the patients with AEI of different
etiology.
Patients and methods. There were 90 patients aged from 1 month to 7 years, who had AEI of different etiology. Group I included 30 children who received,
in addition to the basic therapy, Hylak forte. Group II included 30 patients who did not receive any pre-, meta- or probiotic formulations. In Group III, 30 chil-
dren received probiotics containing live Lacto- or Bifidobacteria. The groups were completely comparable.
Results. The children who received Hylak forte or various probiotics, had a significantly shorter duration of vomiting and diarrhea, and less frequent allergic
reactions, than the children in group II. No significant effect on the duration of the fever and intoxication syndromewas observed.
Conclusions. The children with AEI have a reduced number of the members of the normal flora, which promotes the growth of pathogenic and conditionally
pathogenic microorganisms, delays the recovery of the structures damaged by pathological process and causes metabolic disorders. Metabiotics do not con-
tain intact bacteria, but are composed of the products of their metabolism, offering the same effects as live microorganisms. Hylak forte is a medicinal
product with a unique composition, which includes the metabolites of the main representatives of normal human microflora. Hylak forte reduces duration of
the main symptoms: vomiting and diarrhea in children and reduces the risk of allergic reactions when prescribed in addition to the basic treatment of the AEI.
Key words: diarrhea, metabiotic, acute enteric infection, probiotics, vomiting, Hylak forte
For citation: Ruzhentsova T.A., Ploskireva A.A., Gorelov A.V. Correction of dysbiotic disorders developing in acute enteric infections in children // RMJ. 2017.