Comparative assessment of the Dermatology Life Quality Index in patients with chronic inflammatory dermatoses
N.V. Batkaeva, E.A. Batkaev, M.M. Gitinova

RUDN University, Moscow

Aim: to evaluate and compare the quality of life of patients with various chronic dermatoses according to the Dermatology Life 
Quality Index questionnaire (DLQI).
Patients and Methods: main groups consisted of patients suffering from severe forms of psoriasis (Ps), psoriatic arthritis (PsA) 
and other chronic dermatoses who were hospitalized at the Korolenko Branch of the Moscow Research and Practical Center for 
Dermatovenerology and Cosmetology in 2017. The quality of life of patients was assessed by the DLQI questionnaire in points. 
For statistical analysis, M and σ±m, Chi­square were calculated.
Results: the average DLQI value in patients of the main group was 15.8±5.2 points, that is, the disease had a very strong 
impact on the patient’s life. In patients with only skin manifestations of Ps, the mean value of DLQI was 12.2±3.6 points, in 
PsA patients — 22.3±5.0 points, in patients with other chronic dermatoses — 10.1±6.7 points (p<0.05). The mean DLQI value 
in patients with comorbidities was 16.1±5.3 points (n=112).
Conclusion: all patients with chronic inflammatory dermatoses had a high mean DLQI value, which indicates a very strong 
influence of dermatological disease and comorbid pathology on the patient’s quality of life. Among them, the highest rates 
were in patients with Ps and PsA. In patients with PsA, the mean DLQI value was significantly higher than in patients with 
cutaneous form of Ps and other dermatoses of the skin. Among comorbid pathology, the highest rates were observed in 
patients suffering from PsA with concomitant cardiovascular pathology and intestinal diseases. Thus, PS patients require 
an integrated approach and dynamic observation by dermatologists and doctors of related specialties in order to early 

68

РМЖ, 2018 №8(II)ДерматологияОригинальные статьи
diagnose  PsA  and  comorbid  pathology  and  timely  therapy,  which  will  significantly  increase  the  quality  of  life  of  such 
patients and their ability to work.
Key words: Dermatology Life Quality Index of patients, psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, chronic inflammatory dermatosis.
For  citation:  Batkaeva  N.V.,  Batkaev  E.A.,  Gitinova  M.M.  Comparative  assessment  of  the  Dermatology  Life  Quality  Index  
in patients with chronic inflammatory dermatoses // RMJ. 2018. № 8(II). P. 68–71.