Retrospective study of anamnestic data on patients with vulgar psoriasis
O.Yu. Olisova, L.G. Garanyan

Sechenov University, Moscow

Aim: developing an algorithm for managing patients with the vulgar psoriasis based on severity and prevalence of the disease, 
pruritus, comorbidity, and the mental and socioeconomic status of patients
Patients and Methods: a retrospective study of medical histories of 150 patients with the vulgar psoriasis (68 men and 82 
women) was conducted, during which causes of psoriasis development, the psoriasis severity and prevalence, presence of the 
comorbid conditions and itch were analyzed. The comorbid conditions were observed in 50 (33.3%) patients, of which 22 (44%) 
had polymorbidity. The duration of dermatosis was 15.7 ± 3.8 years on the average.
Results: comorbid conditions were noted in 50 (33.3%) patients, of which 22 (44%) had polymorbidity.
In the endocrine system diabetes mellitus type 2 (compensated) was taken in 11 (22%) patients, nodular goiter in anamnesis — 
in 2 (4%), hypothyroidism — in 2 (4%), and thyroiditis — in 2 (4%).
10 (20%) patients suffered from coronary artery disease and exertional angina; 18 (36%) had arterial hypertension stage II,  
risk 2. Two (4%) patients in the past suffered a myocardial infarction, atherosclerosis was observed in 4 (8%) patients.
Liver diseases were noted in 7 (14%) patients, among them non­alcoholic fatty liver disease — in 3 (43%), chronic hepatitis —  
in 4 (57%).
Conclusion: the data obtained in the course of retrospective study should be taken into account in a personalized approach 
to the treatment of patients with vulgar psoriasis, and an assessment of the severity of each comorbid state and its impact on 
course of the disease and patient’s quality of life should influence the choice of anti­psoriatic therapy. In addition to taking 
into account the severity of the psoriatic process, stage, comorbid conditions, one should also consider the attitude to the 
disease of patient.

72

РМЖ, 2018 №8(II)ДерматологияОригинальные статьи
Key words: psoriasis, multicenter study, retrospective study, itch, comorbidity, polymorbidity.
For citation: Olisova O.Yu., Garanyan L.G. Retrospective study of anamnestic data on patients with vulgar psoriasis // RMJ. 