Disturbed skin microbiocenosis correction in children with atopic dermatitis
E.A. Batkaev, I.V. Popov

RUDN University, Moscow

Disturbed skin microbiocenosis plays a special role in maintaining skin inflammation in atopic dermatitis (AD). In this case, most 
often, there is a contamination of the skin of patients with microorganisms: S. aureus, Candida spp., Malassezia spp., antigens 
of which acquire properties of triggers of the disease.
Aim: to create an algorithm for assessing a degree of disturbance of the skin microbiocenosis and treatment scheme in its 
deterioration.
Patients and Methods: 120 patients aged from 3 to 15 years were included in the study. Severity of AD was determined by a 
clinical picture of the disease, the SCORAD index and serum total IgE level. A degree of skin dissemination by the conditionally 
pathogenic flora was assessed by determination of colony­forming units (CFU) in bacteriological study and by specific IgE 
level. In complex treatment for correction of disturbed skin microbiocenosis Sanguiritrin (in a form of liniment, alcohol solution, 
tablets), having a wide spectrum of antimicrobial and antifungal activity, was included.
Results and Discussion: in mild AD, only external treatment with Sanguiritrin liniment displayed a significant reduction in the 
SCORAD index by 50% in all patients (p <0.05). After 1 year, the SCORAD index was only 55% of the initial level.
In patients with moderate and severe AD, only external treatment with Sanguiritrin liniment showed a significant decrease of 
the SCORAD index by 60% (p <0.05). However, 1 year after the treatment, the SCORAD index was restored to 94% of the initial 
level. In patients receiving, in addition to the external treatment, systemic therapy with Sanguiritrin (in tablets), a decline in the 
SCORAD index by 56% was found (p <0.05). After 1 year of the treatment, the index was 75% of the initial level. These data is 
also confirmed by results of cultural and allergological examination.

76

РМЖ, 2018 №8(II)ДерматологияОригинальные статьи
Conclusion: for the treatment of AD complicated by the skin microbiocenosis deterioration, the drug Sanguiritrin is effective: 
in the mild severity of microbiocenosis deterioration, only external treatment is required; in the moderate and severe AD, the 
addition of systemic therapy with the tablet form of Sanguiritrin is demanded.
Key words: atopic dermatitis, skin microflora, disturbed skin microbiocenosis, IgE, SCORAD index, Sanguiritrin.
For citation: Batkaev E.A., Popov I.V. Disturbed skin microbiocenosis correction in children with atopic dermatitis // RMJ. 2018. 