Experience in the use of a complex uridinemonophosphate drug in the exacerbation of chronic nonspecific lower back pain
Rachin A.P.1, Sharov M.N.2, Vygovskaya S.N.1, Nuvakhova M.B.1, Voropaev A.A.1, Tarasova L.Yu.1

1 National Medical Research Center of Rehabilitation and Balneology, Moscow
2 Moscow State Medical and Stomatological University named after А.I. Evdokimov

In the conditions of polypragmasy of exacerbation of the chronic nonspecific lower back pain, the problem of research of innovative medications meeting the
high requirements of the optimal efficacy and safety ratio, including the nucleotide therapy preparations, is becoming more relevant.
The aim of the study was to assess the efficacy and safety of the use of the Keltikan® complex in exacerbation of chronic nonspecific lower back pain.
Patients and Methods: patients were divided into two groups: 1 group - 20 patients (10 women and 10 men, mean age 44.6 ± 0.84 years) suffering from ex-
acerbation of chronic nonspecific lower back pain received a complex of procedures together with the appointment of the Keltican® complex (1 capsule 1 time
/ day during meals) for 20 days. Group 2 consisted of 30 patients (15 women and 15 men, mean age 46.5 ± 1.34 years) suffering from exacerbation of
chronic nonspecific lower back pain, receiving a complex of procedures. The effectiveness of therapy was assessed by clinical and psychometric methods of
the study after 20 days of treatment and after 90 days of observation. 
Results: the study of pain intensity in the compared groups revealed a significant decrease in this parameter in the "Keltikan® complex" group in comparison
with the "Control" group after 20 days of therapy and after 90 days of observation. In an exacerbation of chronic nonspecific lower back pain, there were no
adverse drug reactions in the group of patients taking the Keltikan® complex, that proves its safety. 
Conclusion: the use of the Keltikan® complex significantly reduces the pain syndrome and improves the quality of life, which makes it possible to recommend
the Keltican® complex as an adjuvant therapy for this category of patients.
Key words: nucleotides, Keltikan® complex, chronic back pain, adjuvant therapy.
For citation: Rachin A.P., Sharov M.N., Vygovskaya S.N. et al. Experience in the use of a complex uridinemonophosphate drug in the exacerbation of chronic
nonspecific lower back pain // RMJ. 2017. № 24. P. 1812–1817.