Sertaconazole administration in outpatient practice
I.V. Khamaganova1, D.F. Kashevarov1, E.N. Malyaremko2, M.V. Maximova2

1 Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow
2 Moscow Center of Dermatovenerology and Cosmetology

A dual antifungal drug sertaconazole (a derivative of imidazole and benzothiophene) allows to solve the problem of resistance 
to antimicotic therapy. The azol structure of imidazole provides a fungistatic effect, benzothiophene has a fungicidal effect. 
The drug is active against yeasts (Candida albicans, С. tropicalis, С. pseudo­tropicalis, С. krusei, С. parapsilosis, С. neofor­
mans), dermatophytes (Trichophyton, Microsporum and Epidermophyton, Torulopsis, Trichosporon and Malassezia), filamen­
tous opportunistic fungi (Scopulariopsis, Altermania, Acremonium, Aspergillus и Fusarium), gram­positive (staphylococci and 
streptococci, L. monocytogenes) and gram­negative bacteria (E. faecium, E. faecalis, Corynebacterium spp., Bacteroides spp.,  
P. acnes), of the Trichomonas genus.
Aim: to study the efficacy and safety of sertaconazole in outpatient practice.
Patients and Methods: 53 patients (39 with glabrous skin rubromycosis, 14 with glabrous skin microsporia) received Zalain® 
cream 2 times a day for 6 weeks. An experimental group consisted of 12 patients (7 with glabrous skin rubromycosis, 5 with 
glabrous skin microsporia), who received 1% clotrimazole cream 2 times a day for 6 weeks.
Results and Discussion: on the first day of applying Zalain® cream, 4 patients showed erythema and itching intensification, 
which were resolved without any additional prescriptions by the end of the 3rd day of therapy. In the experimental group, the 
tolerability of the treatment was good; on the first day of treatment, no patients had any exacerbations. There was no adverse 
effect on the blood or urine parameters as a result of therapy in either the first or the second group. Patients who received 
Zalain® had recovered in all cases, patients who received clotrimazole had a slight improvement in their condition. Observations 
confirm previously reported information about the high efficacy of Zalain® cream.

87

РМЖ, 2018 №8(II)ДерматологияОригинальные статьи
Conclusion: observations allow us to recommend the use of Zalain® cream for rubromycosis and microsporia of glabrous skin.
Key words: rubromycosis, microsporia, skin lesions, antimicotic therapy, resistance, clotrimazole, sertaconazole, Zalain®.
For citation: Khamaganova I.V., Kashevarov D.F., Malyaremko E.N., Maximova M.V. Sertaconazole administration in outpatient 
practice // RMJ. 2018. № 8(II). P. 87–91.