Alternative rehabilitation in post-traumatic gonarthrosis: homeosynatrics is the first choice treatment
Khalyapina A.B., Yarygin N.V.

A.I. Evdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry

Background. Despite current progress in joint surgery, conservative therapy still remains the leading treatment strategy. Homeopathy is an alternative to
the standard treatment and an effective enhancement of NSAIDs and corticosteroids.
Aim. To study a novel area of rehabilitative treatment and secondary prevention of post-traumatic knee osteoarthrosis (OA) using complex effect of allopathy
and homeopathy.
Patients and methods. 144 patients with post-traumatic knee OA aged 23-64 years (mean age 43.2 ± 5.7 years) were enrolled. All patients were subdivided
into 4 groups. Patients in group I received homeosynatric treatment (HT) by using Traumeel S and Zeel T. Patients in group II received medical treatment ac-
cording to standard protocol (SP): NSAIDs. Patients in group III received HT + medical exercises (ME). Patients in group IV received SP + ME. The course of
treatment for all groups was 10 procedures carried out daily.
Results. Rehabilitative treatment of post-traumatic knee OA using homeosynarthria and medical exercises provides significant therapeutic effect as compared
with the standard complex treatment for knee DOA.
Conclusions. Homeosynatrics and medical exercises significantly improve clinical, instrumental, and functional parameters in DOA. Dosed moderate physical
activity reduces pain and increases joint mobility. This management approach requires minimum costs to prevent complications and side effects of NSAIDs.
If the patient is actively involved into the treatment process, medical exercises can be performed for a long time. Early complex physical rehabilitation and
homeosynatrics in early post-traumatic period result in the full recovery of joint mobility, muscular mass, and limb supporting function.
Key words: deforming osteoarthrosis, homeosynatrics, medical exercises.
For citation: Khalyapina A.B., Yarygin N.V. Alternative rehabilitation in post-traumatic gonarthrosis: homeosynatrics is the first choice treatment // RMJ.