Clinical experience of using systemic isotretinoin in the treatment of severe forms of acne
E.V. Matushevskaya1, L.A. Antonova2,3, Yu.I. Matushevskaya4, K.S. Petrova5

1 Institution of Advanced Training, Federal Medical and Biological Agency, Moscow
2 Krasnoyarsk Interdistrict Outpatient Department
3 Epilation and Cosmetology Center «Electra» LLC, Krasnoyarsk
4 Lyubertsy Dermatovenerologic Clinic, Moscow Region
5 Volga Research Medical University, Nizhny Novgorod

For the treatment of medium and severe forms of acne, the prescription of systemic drugs as antibiotics, hormonal drugs, syn­
thetic retinoids is indicated. The article presents data on the effectiveness and safety of systemic isotretinoin (SI) in the practice 
of a dermatologist in the treatment of acne. Issues of the acne pathogenesis, a formation of the phenotypic heterogeneity of 
the Cutibacterium acnes bacterium are considered, an exposome analysis and its effect on the severity and persistence of acne 
is carried out. Recommendations are given on the management of patients with acne, depending on the form and severity of 
the pathological process using SI based on current domestic and foreign recommendations. Data of the clinical use of the drug 
Verocutane® (based on SI) for the treatment of severe forms of acne are presented.
The SI application in the treatment of medium and severe forms of acne is effective and safe and meets the requirements of mod­
ern principles of treatment. A new drug Verocutane® is registered on the Russian pharmaceutical market. The experience of its 
use in the treatment of patients with acne has demonstrated a high therapeutic efficacy and low risk of serious adverse events. 
High efficacy, safety, and an optimal pharmacoeconomic index increase patient compliance with acne therapy.
Key words: acne, exposome, synthetic retinoids, systemic therapy, efficacy, safety, isotretinoin, Verocutane®.
For  citation:  Matushevskaya  E.V.,  Antonova  L.A.,  Matushevskaya  Yu.I.,  Petrova  K.S.  Clinical  experience  of  using  systemic 
isotretinoin in the treatment of severe forms of acne // RMJ. 2018. № 8(II). P. 109–112.