Thoracalgic syndromes and painless biomechanical thoracic dysfunctions in clinical practice
Vasil'ev A.S.1, Shmyrev V.I.1,2

1 Central State Medical Academy of the Department for Presidential Affairs, Moscow
2 Central Clinical Hospital and Outpatient Department of the Department for Presidential Affairs, Moscow

Background: adequate and effective management of thoracic pains and painless biomechanical thoracic dysfunctions is an issue for a clinician which
requires knowledge and skills in several medical fields. The lack of interdisciplinary approach results in increased risks of iatrogenic errors and complications
(including severe ones).
Aim: to identify and to analyze clinically relevant factors in patients with thoracic pains and painless biomechanical thoracic dysfunctions as well as the
modalities for their complex treatment.
Patients and methods: patients with various disorders manifested with clinically relevant thoracic diseases and thoracic pain who were admitted to the med-
ical institutions of the Department for Presidential Affairs and Clinical City Hospital No. 51 were included in the study. The patients underwent standard
clinical examination (screening), neurological examination, manual diagnostic procedures, and other examinations (as indicated). Post-isometric relaxation
with respiratory and oculomotor synergies, myofascial release, dermatofascial release, manual inactivation of trigger points, and modified peripheral cran-
iosacral techniques were used to correct pathological conditions. Pharmacotherapy was prescribed for indications.
Results: pathogenesis, clinical relevance, and management strategies for thoracic pains and painless biomechanical thoracic dysfunctions were assessed in
the course of the study.
Conclusions: thoracic pains and painless biomechanical thoracic dysfunctions significantly affect the quality of life and prognosis due to the development of
secondary pains, episodes of vertigo, limited movements, respiratory discomfort, insomnias, decreased working capacity, and cognitive mnestic disorders.
Management of thoracic pains and painless biomechanical thoracic dysfunctions should be complex, interdisciplinary, and be tailored to pain origins, the
type of biomechanical changes, disease stage.
Key words: thoracalgia, biomechanical dysfunction, pain syndrome, multidisciplinary approach, treatment.
For citation: Vasil'ev A.S., Shmyrev V.I. Thoracalgic syndromes and painless biomechanical thoracic dysfunctions in clinical practice // RMJ. 2016. № 25.