Myofascial syndrome and its role in back pains
Novikova L.B., Akopyan A.P.

Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa

Background. Back pains are an important medical social issue since they rank first in the list of reasons for visiting the doctor and temporary disability.
Aim. To analyze the specificity of pain syndrome in myofascial pains of various localization and treatment efficacy.
Patients and methods. The study enrolled 43 patients (mean age 41.9±1.2 years) with chronic back pains (34 women and 9 men). All patients underwent
clinical instrumental and neuropsychological examination which included radiological methods and surveys using Anxiety and Depression Scale, Brief Pain
Inventory, and McGill Pain Questionnaire. Average parameters were calculated. Statistical analysis was performed using Student’s test and Fisher’s test.
Results. Pains occurred predominantly in the upper back. Cervical discomfort was often associated with cervicogenic headaches. Myofascial dysfunction in
the lower back was accompanied by radiculopathy and facet syndrome. 39.5% of patients with cervical and shoulder girdle pains were diagnosed with dys-
graphia, instability and/or hypermobility of cervical spinal motor segments, and craniovertebral abnormalities which predict musculoskeletal pains. In 4 pa-
tients pain syndrome was referred to as fibromyalgia. Upper back myofascial pains significantly correlated with emotional disorders. NSAIDs and muscle
relaxants, complex homeopathic medicines (i.e., Traumeel S, Discus compositum, Zeel T) were prescribed to reduce exacerbations of chronic pains. Anxiety
and depression required antidepressants. Local pressure on trigger points, careful manual techniques, and bio-resonance therapy were applied as well.
Conclusions. Chronic myofascial pains are often associated with emotional disorders which significantly predominate in upper back pains and fibromyalgia
with minimal neurological signs and without MRI or CT signs of nerve or root compression. Clinical experience with homeopathy and ultra-fine bio-resonance
therapy to reduce pains demonstrate that these techniques are effective even after two or three treatment sessions.
Key words: chronic pain, myofascial pain syndrome, emotional disorders, treatment, biopuncture Traumeel S, Zeel T, Discus compositum.
For citation: Novikova L.B., Akopyan A.P. Myofascial syndrome and its role in back pains // RMJ. 2016. № 25. P. 1711– 1714.