Pharmacotherapy of acute respiratory infections in children: the possibility of reducing the drug load
Bulgakova V.A.

National Medical Research Center of Children’s Health, Moscow

Acute respiratory infections are the most common cause of application for medical help. Repeated respiratory viral infections 
and their complications in children are a significant problem for both the family and society. Often, especially in young children, 
a viral infection of the respiratory tract leads to the development of serious complications, the attachment of a bacterial infection, 
which  contributes  to  a  more  severe  course  and  a  change  in  the  clinical  picture  of  the  disease.  Acute  respiratory  infections 
with their variety of clinical manifestations may cause an unreasonable drug prescription, polypragmasy and polypharmacy. 
The problem of effective and safe treatment and prevention of acute respiratory infections is one of the most urgent issues 
in  clinical  pediatrics.  The  article  considers  the  possibility  of  using  Isoprinosine  (Inosine  pranobex),  an  antiviral  agent  with 
the immunostimulating action, in the therapy of acute respiratory viral infections (ARVI). The author presents an overview 
of scientific data on the efficacy and tolerability of this drug. It is shown that its mechanism of action with a dual therapeutic 
effect (antiviral and immunostimulating) makes it possible to reduce the need for additional prescription of other drugs for ARVI 
treatment. The use of Isoprinosine can reduce the duration and severity of symptoms of acute respiratory viral infection, the 
need for prescribing other medicines (including antibiotics), and restore the immunity suppressed by viral infection.
Key words: acute respiratory infections, viruses, immune response, antiviral drugs, inosine pranobex, Isoprinosine.
For citation: Bulgakova V.A. Pharmacotherapy of acute respiratory infections in children: the possibility of reducing the drug 
load // RMJ. 2018. № 5(II). P. 77–80.