The role of allergen components in the complex diagnosis of pollinosis and prediction of allergen-specific immunotherapy efficacy
L.R. Khabibulina1, N.V. Vlasova2, M.V. Manzhos1, L.M. Kavelenova2

1 Medical University “Reaviz”, Samara
2 Samara University

Aim: to determine the profile of specific IgEs in patients with weed pollen sensitization in Samara and to identify the causes of poor efficacy 
of allergen-specific immunotherapy (ASIT) by means of component-based allergy diagnostic testing.
Patients and Methods: specific IgEs to the major allergens of Ambrosia and Artemisia (Amb a 1 and Art v 1, respectively), minor allergen of 
Artemisia (Art v 3), and native allergenic extract of Ambrosia trifida were tested in 50 patients with weed pollen sensitization and poor effica-
cy of ASIT with Artemisia allergen. The testing was performed using ImmunoCAP ISAC system (Sweden).
Results: 74% of patients (n=37) were sensitized to Art v 1, 18% (n=9) to Art v 3, 34% (n=17) to Аmb а 1, and 78% (n=39) to the allergenic ex-
tract of Ambrosia trifida. In 26 patients with poor efficacy of ASIT, 11.5% (n=3) required ASIT with Artemisia allergen only, 65.4% (n=17) re-
quired ASIT with Artemisia and Ambrosia allergens, 11.5% (n=3) required ASIT with Ambrosia allergen, and 11.5% (n=3) did not require ASIT.
Conclusion:  ASIT  with  Artemisia  allergen  without  considering  additional  sensitizing  factor  (Ambrosia  trifida)  results  in  poor  efficacy  of 
ASIT. The diagnosis of true allergy and medication choice for ASIT should be based on careful allergy history, clinical manifestations, skin 
testing, and ImmunoCAP ISAC testing.
Keywords: pollinosis, Ambrosia trifida, immunotherapy, ASIT, component-based allergy diagnostic testing, aeropalinology, Artemisia.
For citation: Khabibulina L.R., Vlasova N.V., Manzhos M.V., Kavelenova L.M. The role of allergen components in the complex diagnosis of 
pollinosis and prediction of allergen-specific immunotherapy efficacy. RMJ. 2019;3:7–10.