Clinical efficacy of immunotherapy for atopic dermatitis in children
E.A. Kokov1, N.V. Kolesnikova1, L.N. Kokova1, T.M. Andronova2

1Kuban State Medical University, Krasnodar
2JSK “Peptek”, Moscow

Aim:  to  improve  clinical  efficacy  of  complex  treatment  for  exacerbations  of  IgE-mediated  atopic  dermatitis  in  children  using 
glucosaminylmuramyl dipeptide (GMPD) — Licopid, immunomodulator of microbial origin.
Patients  and  Methods:  85  children  aged  6–9  years  with  exacerbations  of  moderate  IgE-mediated  atopic  dermatitis  without  clinical 
manifestations of bacterial, viral, or fungal comorbidities by the time of examination were enrolled in the study. The patients were subdivided 
into three groups characterized by similar course and area of skin lesions but different treatment strategies. Group 1 (n=30) received complex 
treatment which included one course of GMPD (Licopid). Group 2 (n=25) received traditional treatment without immunotherapy. Group 3 
(n=30) received complex treatment which included two courses of GMPD (Licopid) with a 2-month interval.
Results: complex treatment of exacerbations of IgE-mediated atopic dermatitis using GMPD (Licopid, course dosage 25 mg) reduces the 
area of skin lesions and the severity of clinical manifestations (subjective signs have totally disappeared after 2 months of the treatment).  
In addition, two courses of immunotherapy (a total dose of 50 mg) reduces the rate of atopic dermatitis exacerbations and comorbidities more 
significantly than traditional treatment.
Conclusions: GMPD (Licopid) should be recommended as the first choice drug in the complex immunotherapy due to its clinical efficacy 
as  a  part  of  complex  treatment  for  exacerbations  of  erythematous  squamous  and  lichenoid  IgE-mediated  atopic  dermatitis  with  clinical 
manifestation.
Keywords: atopic dermatitis, traditional treatment, immunotherapy, muramyl peptides, clinical efficacy, glucosaminylmuramyl dipeptide, Licopid.
For  citation:  Kokov  E.A.,  Kolesnikova  N.V.,  Kokova  L.N.,  Andronova  T.M.  Clinical  efficacy  of  immunotherapy  for  atopic  dermatitis  
in children. RMJ. 2019;3:11–14.