Community-acquired pneumonia in a teenager with the first revealed bronchiectasis
Bardenikova S.I.1, Zaytseva O.V.1, Snitko S.Yu.1, Dovgun O.B.2

1 A. I. Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry
2 Children’s City Clinical Hospital of St. Vladimir, Moscow

The article presents a clinical case of bronchiectasis diagnosed for the first time with pneumonia in a boy at the age of 
13  years.  The  severe  course  of  the  disease  with  severe  respiratory  insufficiency,  subcutaneous  emphysema,  infectious-
toxic  cardiomyopathy,  pulmonary  edema,  was  accompanied  by  an  x-ray  picture  of  multi-focal  (multilobar,  bilateral) 
pulmonary lesion and did not correspond to community-acquired infection and the safe premorbid background of the child. 
Multispiral computed tomography, performed when local symptomatology in the lungs after resolving acute inflammation 
returned, revealed structural changes in the bronchial tree — cylindrical bronchiectasis. With the resolution of pneumonia, 
the boy showed a clinical picture of bronchial obstructive syndrome, as a result, probably, of intrahospital superinfection 
with  atypical  pathogens  (mycoplasmas,  pneumocysts)  against  the  background  of  a  decrease  in  immune  resistance.  The 
article  notes  that  the  frequent  cause  of  bronchial  obstructive  syndrome  in  patients  without  atopic  heredity  is  atypical 
infections occurring in the form of obstructive bronchitis. The article discusses the following issues: congenital genesis of 
multiple bronchiectasis, possible causes of their late verification, the role of the severe course of the present disease with 
the successive change of infectious agents, algorithms for treating the patient with the importance of active drainage and 
anti-relapse antibacterial therapy. Issues for discussion are the potential risks of exacerbation of the disease, rational ways 
of rehabilitation, including active immunization with bacterial pneumococcal vaccines and hemophilic rod, palliative surgical 
intervention — capable of improving the prognosis of the disease and the quality of life of a teenager with bronchiectatic 
disease.
Key words: community-acquired pneumonia, pulmonary edema, broncho-obstructive syndrome, superinfection, bronchiectatic 
disease, rehabilitation, prognosis.
For citation: Bardenikova S.I., Zaytseva O.V., Snitko S.Yu., Dovgun O.B. Community-acquired pneumonia in a teenager with the 
first revealed bronchiectasis // RMJ. 2018. № 5(II). P. 104–112.