Antiparasitic therapy effect on the course of bronchial asthma in children
R.M. Fayzullina1, A.V. Sannikova1, N.V. Samigullina1, R.R. Gafurova1, R.N. Valeeva1, A.K. Khanova2

1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa
2MMC Clinic of Allergology and Pediatrics LLC, Ufa

Bronchial asthma (BA) is a chronic inflammatory respiratory tract infection that ranks first among chronic bronchopulmonary diseases in 
childhood. Its heredity is of paramount importance, as well as environmental factors (e.g. parasitosis).
Aim: to study the BA clinical and immunological features in children with parasitic invasion before and after antiparasitic therapy.
Patients and methods: children with BA without parasitic invasion (n=45) and children with BA and parasitosis (n=30) underwent a pro-
spective comparative study. Antiparasitic therapy with albendazole was administered to all patients with identified invasion. The study of BA 
clinical course and allergological examination results was performed before and after antiparasitic therapy.
Results: BA in children with parasitic invasion was characterized by the following: persistent course, increase in the exacerbations frequency 
and the basic anti-inflammatory therapy volume, uncontrolled course (p=0.0012), decrease in external respiration indices (p=0.004), sig-
nificant increase eosinophils count (p=0.024), and total IgE level in blood. It was revealed that in children with combined BA and parasitosis 
course, most frequent allergy was to: house dust (p=0.007); dog hair (p=0.008) and guinea pigs (p=0.001) allergens; Aspergillus fumigatus 
fungi (p=0.036) and Candida albicans (p=0.024); as well as a number of food allergens. Also, antiparasitic therapy contributed to an increase 
in the number of patients with a mild intermittent course (p=0.0001) and control level (p=0.0072), a decrease in the exacerbations frequency 
(p<0.001), an absence of severe BA exacerbations, and a decrease in the blood eosinophils average level. Skin allergy test conducted at the end 
of observation showed an increase in the parameter of domestic and pollen allergens in children with BA. At the same time, positive results fre-
quency of skin allergen tests decreased by epidermal and fungal allergens, with the significance of differences — by food allergens (p <0.05).
Conclusion: parasitic invasion in children with BA is a frequent comorbid condition. Antiparasitic therapy leads to an improvement in the 
clinical course of the disease and increases the allergic diagnosis objectivity.
Keywords: bronchial asthma, parasitosis, antiparasitic therapy, allergy testing, children.
For  citation:  Fayzullina  R.M.,  Sannikova  A.V.,  Samigullina  N.V.  et  al.  Antiparasitic  therapy  effect  on  the  course  of  bronchial  asthma  in 
children. RMJ. 2019;3:22–26.