Ultrasound of peripheral immune system in children with palatine tonsil hypertrophy who receive treatment with azoximer bromide
O.V. Vozgoment1,2, A.G. Nadtochiy1, E.P. Karpova2, Ya.S. Aval’yan2, A.I. Aminova3, A.A. Akatova4

1Central Research Institute of Dental and Maxillofacial Surgery, Moscow
2Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional Education, Moscow
3Sechenov University, Moscow
4Federal Scientific Center for Medical and Preventive Health Risk Management Technologies, Perm

Aim:  to  demostrate  the  importance  of  ultrasound  examination  of  the  peripheral  immune  system  for  treatment  decision  and  monitoring 
of immunomodulatory therapy efficacy in children with palatine tonsil hypertrophy when using azoximer bromide.
Patients and Methods: 77 children aged 3–7 years with palatine tonsil hypertrophy and systemic lymphoid hyperplasia (study group) and 
90 healthy children of the same age (control group) underwent clinical, ultrasound, and immunological examinations. Peripheral immune 
system status, immunological parameters, and changes in sonographic signs after intramuscular azoximer bromide were compared.

РМЖ, 2019 № 3

27


Results: significant differences in sonographic signs which demonstrate systemic lymphoid hyperplasia, i.e., maximum linear blood flow 
velocity  in  jugulodigastric  lymph  node  artery  (14.5±1.8  cm/sec  and  11.7±1.6  cm/sec,  respectively),  splenic  mass  index  (4.55  and  3.9, 
respectively), and splenic lymph follicle hyperplasia as well as in laboratory parameters (i.e., interleukins, cytotoxic lymphocytes, B cells, 
malondialdehyde, and plasma total antioxidant capacity) were revealed between the groups. After personalized treatment with azoximer 
bromide, decrease in palatine tonsil sizes, mean group splenic mass index, and reactive lymph follicle hyperplasia was reported in 60% of 
children.
Conclusions:  ultrasound  of  peripheral  immune  system  distinguishes  between  local  and  systemic  lymphoid  hyperplasia  in  children  with 
palatine tonsil hypertrophy, determines baseline status of lymphoid organs, and monitors treatment efficacy.
Complex treatment using intramuscular injections of azoximer bromide reduces splenic mass index and splenic lymph follicle hyperplasia. 
This demonstrates total improvement of lymphoid hyperplasia in children with palatine tonsil hypertrophy.
Keywords: palatine tonsil hypertrophy, systemic lymphoid hyperplasia, peripheral immune system, spleen ultrasound, splenic mass index, 
azoximer bromide, Polyoxidonium.
For citation: Vozgoment O.V., Nadtochiy A.G., Karpova E.P. et al. Ultrasound of peripheral immune system in children with palatine tonsil 
hypertrophy who receive treatment with azoximer bromide. RMJ. 2019;3:27–31.