Features of etiological diagnosis of lymphoproliferative syndrome in children
M.V. Drozdova, Yu.S. Preobrazhenskaya, E.V. Tyrnova, S.N. Larionova

Saint Petersburg Research Institute of Ear, Throat, Nose and Speech

Aim:  to  analyse  the  features  of  etiological  diagnosis  of  lymphoproliferative  syndrome  in  children­candidates  for  surgical 
treatment.
Patients and Methods: 233 children aged from 3 to 16 years with acute lymphoproliferative syndrome, 157 children aged 
from 3 to 16 years with chronic lymphoproliferative syndrome, 100 children aged from 1 to 7 years with a high degree of 
hearing loss were examined in Saint Petersburg Research Institute of Ear, Throat, Nose and Speech. In addition to a general 
examination, hematological examination was carried out, including verification of the diagnosis of herpes infection.
Results: it was established that the acute form of lymphoproliferative syndrome in 33.5% of cases was caused by beta­hemolytic 
streptococcus.  In  30.9%  of  the  examined  children,  heterophilic  antibodies  associated  with  infectious  mononucleosis  were 
detected in the serum. In 16% of children, the acute lymphoproliferative syndrome of mixed etiology was diagnosed: infectious 
mononucleosis and streptococcal infection. Chronic lymphoproliferative syndrome was detected in 157 children from among 
those who applied to decide on the need for surgical treatment. It was established that in most cases (more than 74%) the 
Epstein­Barr virus (EBV) is the etiological factor in the development of lymphoid proliferation. Cytomegalovirus infection in 
most cases was detected in combination with other pathogens — in 34.39% of cases with EBV, and in 14.65% — with EBV and 
beta­hemolytic streptococcus.
Conclusion: for verification of the diagnosis, it is now advisable to introduce modern methods of laboratory diagnostics, which 
will increase the level of patient care in connection with the etiological diagnosis. Clarification of the etiology of lymphadenopathy 
of infectious origin is a necessary condition for adequate etiotropic therapy. The emergence of information about new etiological 
agents of lymphoproliferative syndrome in children and modern laboratory and diagnostic technologies gives some hope for 
the development of effective measures to prevent and treat these diseases and reduce the burden of economic load on the state.
Key words: cytomegalovirus, Epstein­Barr virus, children, lymphoproliferative syndrome, high degree of hearing loss.
For  citation:  Drozdova  M.V.,  Preobrazhenskaya  Yu.S.,  Tyrnova  E.V.,  Larionova  S.N.  Features  of  etiological  diagnosis  
of lymphoproliferative syndrome in children // RMJ. 2018. № 10(II). P. 63–67.