On the classification of the petrous pyramid cholesteatoma
Anikin I.A.1, Khamgushkeeva N.N.1, Ilin S.N.1, Bokuchava T.A.2

1 Saint-Petersburg Scientific Research Institute of Ear, Nose, Throat and Speech
2 Murmansk Regional Clinical Hospital named after P.A. Bayandin

Cholesteatoma is the tumor formed by keratinizing epithelium, keratin residues and perimatrix of various thicknesses with or without surrounding inflamma-
tory reaction. In 2.9% of patients with cholesteatoma it spreads to the petrous pyramid. Aggressive growth of the petrous pyramid cholesteatoma can lead to
the destruction of the underlying bone structures with the spread of the tumor to the clivus, the sphenoid sinus, the infratemporal fossa, the nasopharynx
with possible penetration into the subdural space.
Aim: the detailed classification of the petrous pyramid cholesteatoma.
Patients and Methods: this prospective study included 22 patients with chronic suppurative otitis media who had a petrous pyramid cholesteatoma. The di-
agnosis is based on an otolaryngological examination, multispiral computed tomography (MSCT) of temporal bones, MRI of the middle ear, diffuse-weighted
MRI of the brain. The average age of the patients was 39.2 ± 7 years. The Moffat-Smith 2008 classification of the petrous pyramid cholesteatoma was used
in the work.
Results: MSCT of the temporal bone reveals various destructive processes with high accuracy and specificity, that is important for determining the boundaries
of    the  tumor  and  thus  the  classification  of  the  petrous  pyramid  cholesteatoma.  Based  on  CT  images  and  updated  Moffat-Smith  petrous  pyramid
cholesteatoma classification, depending on the location in relation to the labyrinth the tumors were distributed on the supra-labyrinth (n-9), supra-labyrinth-
apical (n-3), infra-labyrinth (n-3), infra-labyrinth-apical (n-5), massive labyrinth (n-1) and massive labyrinth petrous pyramid cholesteatoma with apical
proliferation (n-1).  Thus, in this article we have attempted to describe the boundaries of various types of the petrous pyramid cholesteatoma on the basis of
the MSCT of the temporal bones.
Conclusion: the use of the proposed classification will provide an opportunity to determine the type of the petrous pyramid cholesteatoma and will help in
choosing the tactics of surgical treatment of this pathology.
Key words: the petrous pyramid cholesteatoma, chronic suppurative otitis media, classification, computed tomography.
For citation: Anikin I.A., Khamgushkeeva N.N., Ilin S.N., Bokuchava T.A. On the classification of the petrous pyramid cholesteatoma // RMJ. 2017. № 23.