Features of the acquired atresia of the membranous-cartilaginous section of the external auditory canal and the effectiveness of new surgical treatment
Anikin I.A., Eremin S.A.

St. Petersburg Scientific Research Institute of Ear, Nose, and Speech 

One of the diseases leading to hearing loss and decreasing the quality of life is the acquired atresia of the external auditory canal (EAC).
Aim: to analyze the causes of atresia in the membranous-cartilaginous part of the EAC, its severity and the influence on the results of surgical treatment.
Patients and Methods: the study included 15 patients with complete EAC atresia in the membranous cartilaginous part or partial atresia with a lumen of less
than 3 mm and clinical manifestations.
Results: it has been revealed that the causes of atresia in the membranous-cartilaginous part of the EAC and the concomitant pathology of the deeper areas
are mainly the trauma and the previous surgical operation. It is established that the development of cholesteatoma depends on the same reasons that caused
atresia: the formation of cholesteatoma is most likely with the traumatic nature of atresia. It is revealed that a complete absence of EAC lumen always leads
to the appearance of the pathology of its bone section, in contrast to stenosis. The diagnostic role of computer tomography in the detection of concomitant
pathology has been confirmed. A new method has been developed to eliminate the acquired atresia of the membranous-cartilaginous part of the EAC; it in-
cludes complete meatal cartilage resection, partial auricular cartilage resection, the formation of skin flaps and fixing them to the bone part of the ear canal.
Conclusions: atresia of the EAC in the membranous cartilaginous area develops mainly as a result of trauma or surgery, and the complete atresia of the
membranous cartilage part always leads to the pathology of deeper parts of the ear. A new way to eliminate atresia of the EAC showed a high efficiency of
hearing restoration and a reduction in the risk of repeated atresia.
Key words: ear surgery, atresia of the external auditory canal, hearing loss, cholesteatoma, surgery, acquired atresia. 
For citation: Anikin I.A., Eremin S.A. Features of the acquired atresia of the membranous-cartilaginous section of the external auditory canal and the effec-
tiveness of new surgical treatment // RMJ. 2017. № 23. P. 1703–1706.