Drug and non-drug methods of rehabilitation of children with respiratory infections
O.V. Goncharova1, D.B. Kameldenova1, V.N. Potapov2, O.T. Bogova2, E.A. Satigo3

1 Sechenov University, Moscow
2 Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional Education, Moscow
3 Mechnikov Northwest State Medical University, Saint Petersburg

The article shows the clinical manifestations of acute respiratory infections in children, depending on the type of pathogen 
and describes the characteristics of a cough, its duration in various diseases. Also, it provides general characteristics of 
drugs for the treatment of the cough, including their features directly acting on cough: drugs of central action, peripheral 
action (expectorant, mucolytic drugs, combination drugs), as well as drugs characteristics of an indirect effect on cough 
and features of combined drugs of different pharmacological groups. The indications in children and determined effica­
cy of the expectorant syrup Eucabal®, consisting of liquid extracts of plantain and thyme, emulsion Eucabal® Balsam S, 
consisting of eucalyptus oil and pine needles oil, and ESPA­NAC® mucolytic, based on acetylcysteine, are presented in 
more detail. Considering that in the treatment of respiratory infections, great attention is paid to drug therapy and, to 
a lesser extent, the importance of nutrition, proper care and rehabilitation of children during the recovery period; rec­
ommendations on nutrition in the acute period and recovery period, care for children are given and physical methods of 
rehabilitation (drainage massage, physical therapy, breathing exercises depending on age), increasing the effectiveness 
of drug therapy, are described. Only a comprehensive approach to the treatment of children with respiratory pathology 
contributes to successful recovery and allows the children to avoid complications.
Key words: respiratory infections in children, rehabilitation of children, expectorant drugs, mucolytics, Eucabal®, Eucabal® 
Balsam S, ESPA­NAC®.
For citation: Goncharova O.V., Kameldenova D.B., Potapov V.N. et al. Drug and non­drug methods of rehabilitation of children 
with respiratory infections // RMJ. 2018. № 10(II). P. 84–91.