Clinical observation of histiocytosis, proceeding under the mask of an acute otitis externa, in a child of 1 month 3 weeks
M.V. Molchanova1,2, S.I. Alexeenko1,2, S.A. Artyushkin1

1 Mechnikov Northwestern State Medical University, Saint Petersburg
2 Raukhfus Children City Multi­Profile Clinical Center of High Medical Technologies, Saint Petersburg

A  histiocytosis  is  a  group  of  diseases  that  combine  the  proliferative  process  in  the  monocyte­macrophage  system  with  the 
accumulation of pathological histiocytes in the lesions and a formation of specific granulomas.
There is a possibility of an immunopathological and tumor nature of the disease. A high incidence of spontaneous remission, low 
mortality and an absence of chromosomal abnormalities in cells from lesions are in favor of the immunopathological nature of 
histiocytosis. In favor of the tumor nature — the clonal nature of the Langerhans cells proliferation in the lesions.
Clinical manifestations of histiocytosis are very diverse, which determines the difficulty of diagnosis. Various organs and tissues 
can be involved in the pathological process: skin, lymph nodes, external and middle ear, flat bones, bone marrow, liver, spleen, 
lungs, endocrine glands, gastrointestinal tract, brain.
The article presents a clinical case of histiocytosis diagnosed in a child of 1 month 3 weeks, the clinical manifestations of which 
were masked under the symptoms of an acute otitis externa.
The description of this clinical case is intended to draw attention to the peculiarities of the course of recurrent otitis externa and 
otitis media in infants, as the “mask” of these diseases may be histiocytosis.
Key words: acute otitis externa and otitis media, infants, histiocytosis, computerized tomography.
For citation: Molchanova M.V., Alexeenko S.I., Artyushkin S.A. Clinical observation of histiocytosis, proceeding under the mask 
of an acute otitis externa, in a child of 1 month 3 weeks // RMJ. 2018. № 10(II). P. 102–104.