ECG diagnosis of sinus node automaticity dysfunctions, substituting complexes and rhythms
V.S. Zadionchenko, A.A. Yalymov, G.G. Shekhyan, A.M. Shchikota

A.I. Evdokimov Moscow State Medical and Dental University, Moscow, Russia

Summary
Despite a variety of functional tests used by cardiologists, electrocardiography (ECG) remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of heart rhythm and conduction dis-
orders. Currently, electrocardiography can be done almost everywhere, however, ECG interpretation by an expert is performed rarely. ECG helps to diagnose cardiac
hypertrophy, heart block and arrhythmias, myocardial ischemic injury as well as to identify extracardiac pathologies, electrolyte imbalances, and the effects of vari-
ous drugs. Electrocardiographic signs and typical clinical symptoms can be grouped into more than 40 clinical electrocardiographic syndromes. Long QT syndrome,
post-tachycardia syndrome, Frederick syndrome, and Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome are the best known conditions. The paper discusses the most difficult part of
ECG diagnostics, i.e., heart arrhythmias. A variety of heart rhythm problems (including arrhythmias caused by sinus dysfunction) make their diagnosis difficult. Nev-
ertheless, adequate interpretation of sinus node automaticity dysfunction is an important issue. The paper summarizes recent opinion on electrocardiographic diag-
nostics of this pathology. Major causes of heart rhythm problems are described. Diagnostic criteria sinus node automaticity dysfunction are illustrated by ECGs. Fi-
nally, current grading system of heart rhythm and conduction disorders as well as algorithms for the differential diagnosis of arrhythmias are reviewed.
Key words: heart automaticity, sinus node, sinus rhythm, escape beat, wandering pacemaker, substituting rhythms, slow atrial rhythm, junctional rhythm,
idioventricular rhythm, sick sinus syndrome, heart block, sinus arrest, atrial asystole.
For citation: Zadionchenko V.S., YalymovA.A., Shekhyan G.G., Shchikota A.M. ECG diagnosis of sinus node automaticity dysfunctions, substituting complex-
es and rhythms // RMJ. Cardiology. 2016. № 9. P. 530–539.