Features of the side effects of glucocorticoids in comparison with manifestations of endogenous hypercorticism
A.V. Dreval, N.A. Budul, I.V. Komerdus, T.A. Britvin, A.A. Glazkov

Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute named after M.F. Vladimirskiy

Aim: the aim of the study was to analyze the side effects of glucocorticoids (GC) and compare them with manifestations of 
endogenous hypercorticism (EH).
Patients and Methods: the study included patients with EH (75 people) - group 1; patients receiving systemic glucocorticoids 
(GC) receiving methylprednisolone and prednisolone (44 people) - group 2; patients receiving topical GC receiving budesonide 
and betamethasone (43 patients) - group 3.
Results  and  discussion:  manifestations  of  hypercorticism  were  more  frequently  observed  in  the  EH  group  than  during  GC 
therapy (p <0,05). Among specific manifestations of hypercorticism, matronism was the most frequently observed symptom (in 
88% of EH patients, in 34,1% of patients receiving systemic GC, in patients receiving topical GC this symptom was not observed). 
Proximal myopathy and a tendency to easy formation of hematomas was more frequent in EH patients than in the group of 
patients receiving GC (in 60% and 50,7% of cases, respectively). Striae were observed in EH patients and in patients receiving 
large doses of prednisolone. During the course of MP therapy, which was comparable in duration to the course of prednisolone 
therapy (1 month), however, the median dose when recalculated to prednisolone was significantly lower (30 mg), striae did not 
develop. Also, striae were not observed during topical GC therapy. After a month of receiving methylprednisolone, there was an 
increase in the incidence of hypokalemia and dyslipidemia, as well as the development of early disorders of carbohydrate me-
tabolism, which were absent before the administration of GC. The frequency of arterial hypertension with EH was higher than 
that of GC. The frequency of bone density disorders in the EH group (with glucocorticosteroma) and during methylprednisolone 
therapy did not differ (p> 0,05). However, in EH patients low-trauma fractures (ribs, spine) were observed.

12

РМЖ, 2018 № 1(I)ЭндокринологияОригинальные статьи
Conclusions: clinical and laboratory manifestations of hypercorticism were more often observed in EH patients than during the 
therapy with various forms of GC. However, adverse effects developed after a month of receiving small doses of systemic GK 
(hypokalemia, dyslipidemia, etc.).
Key  words:  glucocorticoids,  endogenous  hypercorticism,  matronism,  striae,  weight  gain,  hypokalemia,  Itsenko-Cushing’s 
syndrome.
For citation: Dreval A.V., Budul N.A., Komerdus I.V. et al. Features of the side effects of glucocorticoids in comparison with 
manifestations of endogenous hypercorticism // RMJ. 2018. № 1 (I). P. 12–16.