Analysis of the Moscow Region registry of acromegalia patients
Yu.G. Pokramovich, A.V. Dreval

Moscow Regional Scientific Research Clinical Institute named after M.F. Vladimirskiy

Acromegalia  is  a  rare  neuroendocrine  disease  caused  by  a  chronic  hyperproduction  of  somatotrophic  hormone  (STH)  in 
individuals with complete physiological growth. In 2005 the Moscow region registry of patients with acromegalia was created 
to carry out regular monitoring and to optimize treatment.
Aim: to conduct a comparative analysis of the data of the registry of patients with acromegalia in 2007 and 2017.
Patients  and  methods:  the  analysis  of  304  patients  (237  women,  67  men)  included  in  the  Moscow  regional  registry  as 
of  December  2017  is  presented.  Among  them:  32  patients  with  newly  diagnosed  acromegalia,  202  patients  receiving 
somatostatin  analogues  (SSA),  70  patients  after  surgical  treatment  of  the  adenoma  of  the  pituitary.  Instrumental  and 
laboratory examinations of patients were carried out in the Moscow Regional Scientific Research Clinical Institute named 
after M.F. Vladimirskiy.
Results and discussion: the previous analysis was carried out in 2007, at that time 70 patients were registered in it (23% of the 
current value). The analysis of clinical manifestations of acromegalia revealed no significant differences between 2007 and 
2017 (p> 0,05). Most of the patients had complaints on sweating, swelling, headache and muscle weakness, which occurred 
more often in women, then in men. Examination of the patients for the late complications revealed no statistically significant 
differences in the pathology of the cardiovascular system, the gastrointestinal tract, the thyroid gland. During the treatment of 
patients with Octreotide-Depot, the STH baseline decreased from 7,0 ng / ml to 2,5 ng / ml (p <0,05), and the median exceeding 
the upper limit of normal IGF-1 decreased from 265,6% to 115,2% (p <0,05).
Conclusion: keeping a registry of patients with acromegalia allows to track the course of the desease, determine the tactics and 
strategy of treatment, and evaluate the effectiveness of the therapy in dynamics.
Key words: registry, acromegalia, somatotrophic hormone, IGF-1, somatostatin analogues, Moscow region, pituitary.
For citation: Pokramovich Yu.G., Dreval A.V. Analysis of the Moscow Region registry of acromegalia patients // RMJ. 2018. 