Experience  with  the  new  Bethesda  system  for  reporting  thyroid  cytopathology  in  evaluating  the  results  of  fine  needle 
aspiration cytology of thyroid nodules
O.A. Nechaeva, L.G. Bavykina, A.A. Glazkov, T.A. Britvin
Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute named after M.F. Vladimirskiy
Aim: to assess the accuracy on fine needle aspiration (FNA) cytology in verification of thyroid carcinoma.
Patients and Methods: the retrospective study of 1675 case report form was performed. Thyroid ultrasound and FNA were 
performed  on  all  patients  during  2016.  All  thyroid  cyto-pathological  slides  were  reviewed  and  classified  according  to  the 
Bethesda  System  for  Reporting  Thyroid  Cytopathology  (TBSRTC).  During  statistical  processing,  the  relative  and  absolute 
frequencies of occurrence of characteristic values (categories on TBSRTC in the prediction of thyroid cancer malignancy of 
tumors, etc.), the sensitivity, specificity, the prognostic value of the positive (PPV)  and negative result (NPV) were calculated.
Results and Discussion: 115 cases with high cancer risk were communicated to the surgeon, thyroid carcinoma was detected 
in 46 (40%) cases. The sensitivity of FNA cytology diagnostic in the detection of thyroid carcinoma for categories IV+V+VI on 
TBSRTC were 89,1% (95% CI 77–95,3%). The specificity of FNA diagnostic accuracy were 46,3% (35,1–58%) for category IV 
malignant, 97,1% (90–99,2%) for category V and 100% (94,7–100%) for category VI category on TBSRTC. The prognostic 
value of the PPV and NPV results of the cytological study for detection of thyroid cancer in the nodules of IV–VI categories 
on TBSRTC is calculated. The highest value of positive and negative results was recorded in VI category, that is, a positive 
result (the presence of a malignant tumor) in a cytological study was confirmed by histological examination. The least value of 
positive and negative cytological results was expected in IV category, the method allowed to reveal thyroid cancer only in 30,4% 
and allowed to exclude it only in 53,6%.

 РМЖ, 2018 № 1 ( I )

23


Conclusions: fine needle aspiration cytology in the diagnosis of thyroid lesion using the Bethesda system for reporting thyroid 
carcinoma is an informative method. However, further studies are still needed to verify thyroid cancer in IV category on TBSRTC.
Key words: carcinoma, Bethesda system, thyroid, fine needle aspiration, sensitivity, specificity, prognostic value.
For citation: Nechaeva O.A., Bavykina L.G., Glazkov A.A., Britvin T.A. Experience of using the Bethesda system in evaluating the 
results of fine needle biopsy of thyroid nodules // RMJ. 2018. № 1 (I). P. 23–27.