Differential diagnosis and treatment of heart rhythm and conduction disorders (clinical case)
G.G. Shekhyan1, A.A. Yalymov1, A.M. Shchikota1, S.I. Varentsov2, P.A. Bonkin2, A.Yu. Pavlov2, A.S. Gubanov2

1 A.I. Evdokimov Moscow State Medical and Dental University, Moscow, Russia
2 Clinical City Hospital No. 24, Moscow, Russia

Summary
Electrocardiography (ECG) helps to diagnose cardiac hypertrophy, heart block and arrhythmias, myocardial ischemic injury as well as to identify extracar-
diac pathologies, electrolyte imbalances, and the effects of various drugs. Electrocardiographic signs and typical clinical symptoms can be grouped into clin-
ical electrocardiographic syndromes. Clerc-Levy-Cristesco (CLC) syndrome, Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome, early repolarization syndrome, long
QT syndrome, post-tachycardia syndrome, Chatterjee phenomenon, Frederick syndrome, and Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome are the best known condi-
tions. Despite a variety of functional tests used by cardiologists, ECG remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of heart rhythm and conduction disorders.
Currently, electrocardiography can be done almost everywhere, however, ECG interpretation by an expert is performed rarely.
The aim of this clinical case is to discuss heart rhythm and conduction problems. The paper describes clinical case and additional medical tests which help to
diagnose heart conduction disorder and to determine diagnostic and treatment strategy. Explanatory portion illustrates Frederick syndrome, exit block, and
Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome. Differential diagnostic aspects of conditions with loss of consciousness are summarized.
Key words: heart block, Frederick syndrome, Morgagni-Adams-Stokes syndrome, atrioventricular block, atrial fibrillation, exit block, substituting rhythms,
pacemaker, Chatterjee phenomenon, ventricular flutter, ventricular fibrillation, electro pulse therapy, collapse, syncope.
For citation: Shekhyan G.G., Yalymov A.A., Shchikota A.M. et al. Differential diagnosis and treatment of heart rhythm and conduction disorders (clinical case)
// RMJ. Cardiology. 2016. № 9. P. 594–598.