Brief recommendations of russian experts on diagnosis and treatment of migraine
Osipova V.V.1,2, Filatova E.G.3,4, Аrtemenko А.R.1, Lebedeva Е.R.5,6, Azimova J.E.7, Latysheva N.V.3,4, Sergeev A.V.1, Amelin А.V.8, Koreshkina М.I.9, 
Skorobogatykh K.V.7, Еkusheva Е.V.4, Naprienko М.V.3,4, Isagulyan E.D.10, Rachin А.P.11, Danilov А.B.3, Kurushina О.V.12, Parfenov V.A.3, Tabeeva G.R.3,
Gekht А.B.2,13, Yakhno N.N.1

1 Research Department of Neurology of First Moscow State Medical University named after I.M. Sechenov
2 Moscow Scientific and Practical Psychoneurological Center named after Z.P. Solovyov 
3 First Moscow State Medical University named after I.M. Sechenov, Moscow 
4 Clinic of headache and autonomic disorders named after Alexander Vein, Moscow
5 The Urals State Medical University, Ekaterinburg
6 International Headache Center “Europe-Asia”, Ekaterinburg
7 University Headache Clinic, Moscow 
8 First St. Petersburg State medical University named after acad. I.P. Pavlov
9 Headache Treatment Center, “Scandinaviya» Clinic, St. Petersburg
10 National Scientific and Practical Center for Neurosurgery named after N.N. Burdenko, Moscow
11 Russian scientific center of medical rehabilitation and balneology, Moscow

556

РМЖ, 2017 № 9


Неврология

Мнение эксперта

12 Volgograd State Medical University
13 Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow

The presented recommendations of Russian experts on the diagnosis and treatment of migraine are based on the principles of evidence-based medicine. The
recommendations provide the international classification of migraine, the latest revision, diagnostic methods and criteria for various forms of migraine, as
well as basic information on epidemiology, pathophysiological mechanisms, differential diagnosis.
A detailed algorithm for diagnosing and managing a patient with a headache is given in the paper. In case of a typical clinical picture of migraine and the ab-
sence of suspicion of the symptomatic nature of the headache, a diagnosis of a form of migraine is established corresponding to diagnostic criteria. If neces-
sary, the diagnosis includes topical comorbid disorders.
The article presents in detail the medicinal preparations and their dosages for both arresting migraine attacks and prophylactic treatment, having the A, B
or C level of evidence on the basis of RCTs. The main principles of preventive therapy and the recommended terms are considered. In addition to pharmaco-
logical treatment, the article discusses the most effective non-pharmacological approaches to managing patients with migraine. The article considers the
most important migraine triggers, the drug administration rules and the prognosis, on which the behavioral therapy of the disease is based.
Key words: migraine, diagnostics, classification, clinical variants, chronic migraine, medication overuse headache, acute treatment, migraine prophylaxis,
non-pharmacological treatment, neuromodulation.
For citation: Osipova V.V., Filatova E.G., Аrtemenko А.R. et al. Brief recommendations of russian experts on diagnosis and treatment of migraine // RMJ.