Modern concepts of differential diagnosis and treatment of patients with shoulder pain
Samartsev I.N.1,2, Zhivolupov S.A.1,2, Emelin A.Yu.1,2, Rashidov N.A.2, Bardakov S.N.2

1 Military Medical Academy named after S.M. Kirov, St. Petersburg
2 Center of pain treatment at the clinic of nervous diseases of the Military Medical Academy named after S.M. Kirov, St. Petersburg

Patients with shoulder pain represent an extremely heterogeneous group of patients with completely different pathologies: neurological, traumatological,
rheumatological. The prevalence of this problem among the adult population is 4-7%, and it  significantly increases with the age. Widely used in the past, the
term "frozen shoulder" now is considered to be incorrect, because it leads the practitioner away from the differential diagnosis of the cause of pain syndrome
in a particular patient, and the patient himself from cure. Modern knowledge of diseases of periarticular tissues of the shoulder joint allows clinically to dif-
ferentiate various pathologies, manifested by pain in the shoulder area (cervical radiculitis, brachial plexopathy, tendinitis of the muscles of the rotator cuff,
impingement syndrome, the syndrome of "frozen shoulder" (adhesive capsulitis), tendonitis of the biceps muscle of the shoulder, arthrosis of the acromio-
clavicular joint). While classical neurological diseases (radiculopathy and plexopathy) seem familiar enough for practicing physicians, some nosological
forms, mainly related to traumatologic pathology, are extremely difficult for differential diagnosis and therapy. Moreover, for each nosology, special clinical
tests have been developed, treatment algorithms have been proposed, including the use of mainly non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (for example, Ke-
torol) and local injection therapy with glucocorticoids (prodrugs).
Key words: shoulder pain, resistive tests, ketorolac, Ketorol, local injection therapy.
For citation: Samartsev I.N., Zhivolupov S.A., Emelin A.Yu. et al. Modern concepts of differential diagnosis and treatment of patients with shoulder pain //
RMJ. 2017. № 9. P. 564–571.