Comparative opened randomized study on assessment of efficiency and safety of the use of Cocarnit in patients with diabetic polyneuropathy
Rachin A.P.1, Sharov M.N.2

1 Russian Scientific Center for Medical Rehabilitation and Balneology , Moscow
2 Moscow State Medical-Stomatological University named after A.I. Evdokimov

Introduction. Back pain (dorsalgia) is an actual problem of modern clinical medicine, which adversely affects a person's vital activity and significantly
impairs his quality of life.
The aim of the study was to conduct a comparative clinical and psychological analysis of the efficacy and safety of the use of Cocarnit in patients with back
pain suffering from diabetic polyneuropathy.
Patients and methods. All the patients included in the study were randomized into the groups. Group 1 (Cocarnit) - 50 patients (27 women and 23 men, mean
age - 49.8 ± 0.96 years) suffering from exacerbation of chronic dorsalgia, received a complex treatment in combination with Cocarnit (intramuscular injec-
tion, 1 ampoule daily , №9) for 14 days. A delayed visit was 1 month after the start of therapy. Group 2 (Control) - 30 patients (16 women and 14 men, mean
age - 50.5 ± 1.41 years) with the same characteristics suffering from exacerbation of chronic dorsalgia received similar treatment excepting the appointment
of Cocarnit. The study used clinical-anamnestic and neurological research, visual analogue scale, verbal scale, comprehensive pain questionnaire, Osvetro-
vsky pain questionnaire of violations of life with pain in the lower part.
Results: When analyzing the changes in the compared groups, there was found a significant decrease in the «total score by the complex pain questionnaire»,
«pain intensity», the subjective pain assessment in the «Cocarnit» group in comparison with the «Control» group after 14 days of therapy, and a continuing
decrease of this parameter after 30 days of observation. In the group of patients with back pain suffering from diabetic polyneuropathy, who received Cocar-
nit, there were no cases of undesirable drug reactions.

586

РМЖ, 2017 № 9


Неврология

Оригинальные статьи

Conclusions. The data obtained during the study reliably proved that the Cocarnit preparation statistically reduces algic manifestations in patients with
back pain and improves the quality of life in cases of the combination of dorsalgia and diabetic polyneuropathy.
Key words: Back pain, purine analgesia, Cocarnit.
For citation: Rachin A.P., Sharov M.N. Comparative opened randomized study on assessment of efficiency and safety of the use of Cocarnit in patients with
diabetic polyneuropathy // RMJ. 2017. № 9. P. 586–590.