Efficiency of noninvasive neuromodulation in combination with lornoxicam in acute period of craniocerebral trauma 
Voropaev A.A., Rachin A.P.

«Russian Scientific Center for Medical Rehabilitation and Balneology», Moscow

Introduction: the efficiency of using neuromodulation in the acute period of craniocerebral trauma (CCT) as a monotherapy or in combination with nons-
teroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is actively discussed in the scientific literature.
The purpose of the study: to identify on the basis of clinical-neurophysiological and neuroimaging studies the effectiveness of transcranial electrostimulation
(TES) in combination with NSAID Xefocam in the acute period of CCT.
Patients and methods: 65 patients (38 men and 27 women) with acute closed traumatic brain injury (brain concussion, mild brain contusion) were included into
the study, the average age was 37.8 years. Patients were divided into 2 groups. In patients of the main group (n = 35), a TES technique was used in combination
with the oral intake of Xefocam in a daily dose of 16 mg. In the control group (n = 30), the basic therapy was conducted in accordance with the recommendations
for managing patients with CCT in an acute period. Sociometric and psychometric methods were applied to assess the subjective state and severity of cephalgic
syndrome, anxiety, vegetative status. The statistical analysis was carried out using statistical software Statistica and SAS 8.12 for Windows XP.
Results: after the therapy the headache was completely eliminated in 30.6% of patients; the cephalgic syndrome decreased significantly in 45.4% of patients;
in 25.7% of patients the headaches decreased, but did not completely disappear. Regression of electroencephalographic changes in the main group signifi-
cantly exceeded the dynamics of changes in the control group. Recovery of the cerebral vessels reactivity was more pronounced in the main group, in which
there was also a reliably positive dynamics of the linear velocity of the blood flow, in contrast to the control group.
Conclusions: non-invasive neuromodulation combined with oral administration of Xefocam (16 mg / day) is a physiological and well-founded method of
treatment of patients in the acute period of CCT, and when used at an electric frequency of 500±50.0 Hz it becomes an effective method of medical rehabili-
tation of this category of patients due its a neuromodulating and vegetotropic action. 
Key words: acute craniocerebral trauma, posttraumatic headache, transcranial electrostimulation, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, neuromodulation. 
For citation: Voropaev A.A., Rachin A.P. Efficiency of noninvasive neuromodulation in combination with lornoxicam in acute period of craniocerebral trauma
// RMJ. 2017. № 9. P. 591–594.