Antianxiety treatment for patients with «white coat hypertension»
Doronina O.B., Tsoy S.V., Doronina K.S.

Novosibirsk State Medical university, 
Novosibirsk City Neurological Center «Sibneiromed»

The Autonomic Dysfunction Syndrome is closely related with anxiety and neurotic disorders in psychosomatic or functional diseases. For the young and mid-
dle-aged patients it is particularly important to identify the autonomic disorders, manifested by transient increasing of blood pressure, due to their prevalence
and the risk of hypertension development. "White coat hypertension" is a vegetative disorder with transient increasing of blood pressure. The antianxiety and
vegetotrophic drugs are prescribed to patients with "white coat hypertension" to achieve an adequate stress response and because of the great importance of
the neurotic component and associated autonomic disorders which provoke episodes of hypertension.
An open comparative randomized clinical study was held on the basis of the of the Novosibirsk City Neurological Center "Sibneiromed". The aim was to eval-
uate the efficacy and safety of the drug Tenoten in the treatment of young patients with hypertension caused by autonomic dysfunction.
Patients and methods. The study included 76 patients aged from 21 to 40 years with a diagnosis of "White coat hypertension", with the signs of autonomic
disorders and high levels of anxiety and depression. The patients were randomized into 2 groups, comparable in disease duration and severity of clinical im-
plications: the main group - 39 people, the control group - 37 people. Patients of the main group received the Tenoten drug. Blood pressure was measured in
all patients, ECG was recorded, psychological and vegetative testing was provided, it was recommended to keep a diary of blood pressure and heart rate with
measurement of blood pressure in the morning and evening.
Results. The symptoms of depression and anxiety decreased significantly in the main group in comparison with the control group. In assessing the dynamics
of autonomic changes, a significant difference in the study and control groups was revealed. The mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure levels came to
normal values. A course of treatment with Tenoten with anxiolytic and vegetostabilizing effect helps to improve the emotional state, the stabilization of the
vegetative tone and normalize hemodynamic parameters.
Key words: Autonomic dysfunction syndrome, «white coat hypertension», diagnosis of hypertension, antianxiety treatment, Tenoten, prevention of hyper-
tension, release-active antibodies to S-100 brain-specific proteins.
For citation: Doronina O.B., Tsoy S.V., Doronina K.S. Antianxiety treatment for patients with «white coat hypertension // RMJ. 2017. № 9. P. 596–601.