Methods of correcting the fragmentation of sperm DNA in combination with varicocele in men with infertility in marriage
Neimark A.I.1, Neimark B.A.1, Davydov A.V.1,. Nozdrache N.Av1, Borisenko D.V.1, Arkhipov D.O.1, Borisova O.G.2, Semenova N.A.2

1 Altai State Medical University, Barnaul
2 «Mother and Child» Clinic, Barnaul

At present, violations of the paternal genome are receiving increasing attention in reproductive medicine. It is especially important to evaluate the additional
parameters of the ejaculate, in particular, fragmentation of the sperm DNA.
The aim of the study was to determine the diagnostic value of additional sperm tests in men with fertility disorders in varicocele, their relationship to sper-
mogram parameters, and to determine the effect of surgical treatment on the level of fragmentation of sperm DNA.
Patients and methods: The study included 60 people with infertility in marriage and left-sided varicocele of the second degree. After the examination, all pa-
tients underwent varicocelectomy using the Marmar technique. Patients of group 1, in the postoperative period did not receive spermoprotective therapy.
Patients of group 2, were prescribed the drug Androdoz - 2 drops 2 times a day for 6 months beginning from 1 day after the operation. Evaluation of the
spermogram and additional seminal tests were performed before the operation and 6 months after the operation.
Results and discussion: In our study we noted a violation of the main spermogram values (according to WHO 2010), along with an increased level of DNA
fragmentation. Surgical treatment of varicocele can improve the state of sperm DNA, which increases the chance of conception, or improves prognosis in
conducting the assisted reproductive technologies. Surgical treatment in combination with Androdoz had the most positive effect on the results of the main
indicators of the spermogram and the level of fragmentation of the sperm DNA.
Conclusion: Our study showed the reasonability of using additional sperm tests, in particular the determination of the level of DNA fragmentation, when ex-
amining men with impaired fertility. It is necessary to assess the level of fragmentation of sperm DNA in patients with varicocele even with normozoospermia
(according to WHO 2010), which will allow a fuller evaluation of the ability to conceive in this category of patients.

506

РМЖ, 2017 № 8


Урология

Key words: varicocele, infertility, spermogram, fragmentation of sperm DNA, Androdoz, reproductive medicine, seminal tests, ejaculate, spermoprotective
therapy, varicocelectomy.
For citation: Neimark A.I., Neimark B.A., Davydov A.V. et al. Methods of correcting the fragmentation of sperm DNA in combination with varicocele in men
with infertility in marriage // RMJ. 2017. № 8. P. 506–510.