Novel treatment modalities for vegetative dysfunction
Shchukin I.A.1, Lebedeva A.V.1, Fidler M.S.1, Soldatov M.A.2

1 Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow
2 N.I. Pirogov City Clinical Hospital No. 1, Moscow

Background. Vegetative-vascular dystonia is one of the most common di-agnoses in neurology, therapy, and general medicine, in particular, in younger pa-
tients. However, it is not recognized in ICD-10 disease classification system. Clinical manifestations and anamnestic features are unspecified. Vegetative
dysfunction is referred to the condition which combines emotional disorders (anxiety, depression, asthenia) and vegetative signs. Additionally, in daily
clinical practice the treatment of vegetative dysfunction is challenging since pre-scribing benzodiazepine tranquilizers, antidepressants or minor neuroleptics
requires clinical experience and specific skills.
Aim. To assess the efficacy of buspirone in the treatment of emotional (panic, anxious, and moderately depressive) and asthenic disorders in vegeta-tive dys-
function patients.
Patients and methods. 50 patients with vegetative dysfunction were enrolled in this observational study. Follow-up was 60 ± 3 days. All participants received
buspirone/Spitomin (30 mg a day). After 60 ± 3 days, the symptoms were assessed using Hospital Anxiety And Depression Scale, Hamilton Anxiety And De-
pression Scale, Spielberg-Hanin questionnaire, and Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI 20).
Results. Buspirone/Spitomin is highly effective for vegetative dysfunction accompanied by anxiety, depression, asthenia, and panic attacks. Treatment with bus-
pirone results in significant improvement of anxiety, depression, and asthenia in vegetative dysfunction. This drug is characterized by high efficacy and safety.
Key words: vegetative dysfunction, anxiety, depression, asthenia, buspi-rone, Spitomin.
For citation: Shchukin I.A., Lebedeva A.V., Fidler M.S., Soldatov M.A. Novel treatment modalities for vegetative dysfunction // RMJ. 2017. № 9. P. 607–611.