Evaluation of the effectiveness of the acidum hopantenicum in children with developmental delay
Chutko L.S., Surushkina S.Y., Yakovenko E.A., Anisimova T.I., Sergeev A.V.

Institute of the human brain named after N.P. Bekhtereva, St. Petersburg

The delay in mental development is an actual problem, since clear boundaries of this pathology have not been determined yet, and untimely diagnosis of devel-
opmental delay (DD) leads to the selection of an inadequate training program and school disadaptation which may subsequently form a deviant behavior.
The aim of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness of the drug pantogam-syrup in the treatment of children with DD.
Patients and methods. We observed 60 children with developmental delay at the age of 5-7 years. The following methods were used in the work: study of the
neurological status according to the generally accepted scheme; a technique for evaluating fine motor skills (a test for dyspraxia-dysgnosia), test of remem-
bering five figures to test visual memory; the SNAP-IY scale for assessing the degree of inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity; 10 point scales, compiled
on the basis of NN Zavadenko's scales, for assessing and objectifying the degree of expression of speech disorders; Visual Analog Scale (VASH) (10-point
variant) for objectifying the degree of asthenic disorders; electroencephalographic study.
For the treatment of children we used pantogam (10% syrup), at a dose of 7.5 ml per day (2.5 ml - 3 times a day up to 16 hours) for 60 days. The first and
the last 5 days the daily dose was 5 ml per day.
The results of the study show a significantly greater severity of developmental disorders of speech and dyspraxia in children with hyperdynamic form of DD.
Comparative analysis of EEG power spectra showed large values of slow-wave activity of theta-range in children with developmental delay compared with
healthy children from the control group. The high efficiency of pantogam was established (improvement was obtained in 65% of cases), and confirmed by
clinical and neurophysiological research data. The best effect was achieved in the treatment of cerebroasthenic form disease (improvement in 73.3% of cases).
The data obtained make it possible to recommend the use of the drug pantogam-syrup for the treatment of developmental delays.
Key words: psycho-speech delay, Pantogamum syrup.
For citation: Chutko L.S., Surushkina S.Y., Yakovenko E.A. et al. Evaluation of the effectiveness of the acidum hopantenicum in children with developmental
delay // RMJ. 2017. № 9. P. 612–617.