Treatment with Piribedil and Memantine Reduces Noise-Induced Loss of Inner Hair Cell Synaptic Ribbons

Introduction. Noise overstimulation can induce loss of synaptic ribbons associated with loss of Inner Hair Cell – auditory nerve synaptic connections.
The aim of the study was to examine if systemic administration of Piribedil (Pronoran®), a dopamine agonist that reduces the sound evoked auditory nerve
compound action potential and/or memantine, an NMDA receptor open channel blocker, would reduce noise-induced loss of inner hair cell ribbons. 
Material and methods. Rats received systemic memantine and/or piribedil (Pronoran®) for 3 days before and 3 days after a 3 hour 4 kHz octave band noise
at 117 dB (SPL). Three regions of interest were selected along the cochlear spiral at 3.5, 5.5 and 6.5 mm from the apex for quantitative assessment, close to
the 8 and 20 kHz frequency regions respectively of our ABR assessments. ABR measures with I/O functions were collected prior to inclusion in the study and
again at 21 days post-noise exposure, prior to animal termination.
Results. At 21 days following the noise there was a 26% and 38% loss of synaptic ribbons in regions 5.5 and 6.5 mm from apex, respectively, elevations in 4–,
8- and 20 kHz tonal ABR thresholds and reduced dynamic output at higher intensities of stimulation. Combined treatment with Piribedil and Memantine pro-
duced a significant reduction in the noise-induced loss of ribbons in both regions and changes in ABR sensitivity and dynamic responsiveness. Piribedil alone
gave significant reduction in only the 5.5 mm region and memantine alone did not reach significance in either region.
Conclusions. Results identify treatments that could prevent the hearing loss and hearing disorders that result from noise-induced loss of Inner Hair Cell –
Auditory Nerve synaptic connections.
Key words: noise exposure, inner hair cells synaptic ribbons, short-latent auditory evoked potentials, piribedil, Pronoran®, memantine.
For citation: Treatment with Piribedil and Memantine Reduces Noise-Induced Loss of Inner Hair Cell Synaptic Ribbons // RMJ. 2017. № 9. P. 618–624.