Pathophysiological role and tactics of surgical treatment of skeletal lesions in  the concomitant brain injury 
Shapkin Y.G., Seliverstov P.A.

Saratov State Medical University named after V.I. Razumovsky

Хирургия

The review presents the results of experimental and clinical studies of the pathophysiological interactions of skeletal and concomitant brain injury in poly-
trauma. The article considers the problems of timing and the method of osteosynthesis of bones fractures of the extremities and pelvis combined with the
head trauma. Factors of complication of the concomitant brain injury from the fractures of long tubular bones and pelvic bones are the shock-producing
effect, blood loss, increased systemic inflammatory reaction and coagulopathy, which increases the probability of secondary damage to the brain and lungs,
development of embolic, pulmonary complications and multiple organ failure. Early osteosynthesis in fractures of the femur, unstable fractures of the pelvic
bones can reduce the frequency of systemic complications, reduce lethality and improve the anatomical and functional results of treating the polytrauma.
But early unjustified osteosynthesis, being an operational trauma, can provoke the effect of a "second stroke" and increase the severity of brain damage. The
safety of the final osteosynthesis in patients with concomitant brain injury is determined by the level of consciousness, hemodynamic parameters, cerebral
perfusion pressure, intracranial pressure, hypoxemia, the severity of primary brain damage. The tactics of the step-wise treatment of Damage Control Or-
thopedics allow to minimize the risk of secondary brain damage in patients with severe and moderate traumatic brain injury. The study of pathophysiological
interactions of skeletal and traumatic brain injury, mechanisms of brain damage in the phenomenon of "second hit" can become the basis for the development
and optimization of clinical concepts for the treatment of bones fractures in polytrauma.
Key words: polytrauma, associated injury, traumatic brain injury, fractures, secondary brain injury, «second stroke», inflammatory response, multiple organ
failure, control of skeletal injuries, intramedullary osteosynthesis.
For citation: Shapkin Y.G., Seliverstov P.A. Pathophysiological role and tactics of surgical treatment of skeletal lesions in  the concomitant brain injury  //
RMJ. 2017. № 8. P. 523–528.