Prospects for the use of polyfilament titanium suture material Titanell in traumatology
Kazantsev A.A.1,Tulyakov S.S.2, Alekhin A.I.1, Khoninov B.V.3, Kazakova A.V.4, Kozlov N.A.5, Battaray B.5, Babichenko I.I.6

1 Central Clinical Hospital of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 
2 Tyumen Regional Hospital No.3, Tobolsk 
3 State Clinical Hospital No.64, Moscow
4 Tyumen State Medical University 
5 Moscow State University of Veterinary Medicine and Biotechnology named after K.I.Scriabin 
6 Russian People's Friendship University, Moscow

This study focuses on the effectiveness of the use of titanium suture material (TSM) for stitching musculoskeletal tissues, both in acute trauma and in
planned operations. Surgical sutures are frequently the only foreign matter left by a surgeon in a surgical wound where it may cause a spread of surgical in-
fection and promote its virulence. Titanium inertness is a factor which minimizes aseptic inflammation and affects the success of the operation when it de-
pends entirely on the quality of the surgical suture, such as in case of stitching ruptures of large tendons and patella ligament. The work includes: the study
of the technical characteristics of the thread, animal research and applications in clinical practice. During the study, two groups of patients were observed:
in the first TSM was applied, in the second traditional suture materials were used. The study showed the efficacy of using TSM when stitching large tendons
and joint capsules as well as when applying a bone suture. The TSM group demonstrated a significantly lower number of infectious complications. 
The paper discusses this results of the study. It was noted that due to its inertness, titanium could not influence the infectious agents and thereby could

РМЖ, 2017 № 8

533


Хирургия

prevent the development of complications. In view of this, it is assumed that the obstruction to the spread of infection is the dense accreting of the material
by the connective tissue. Besides, the paper describes a wide range of trauma surgeries where the new material was used. Titanium resistance to microbial
infection is an important factor contributing to the fusion of the Achilles tendon, the long head of the biceps, the patellar ligament, it also ensures the absence
of a tissue reaction to the material. The material can be used for bone stitching, which is particularly important when we are talking about prevention of such
serious complication as osteomyelitis. According to the authors, TSM is an optimal suture for acute trauma applications accompanied with high microbial
content of wounds. 
Key words: titanium filaments, surgical knot, suture material, Rosenstein tendon plastic, surgical wound infection
For citation: Kazantsev, A.A. Tulyakov S.S., Alekhin A.I. et al. Prospects for the use of polyfilament titanium suture material in traumatology // RMJ. 2017.