Experimental and clinical justification of mechanisms of multi-purpose therapeutic action of a complex bioregulatory preparation
V.A. Zhernov1, V.K. Frolkov1, M.M. Zubarkina1, L.G. Agasarov2

1 Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia, Moscow
2 National medical research center for rehabilitation and balneology of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, Moscow

Inflammatory processes in the musculoskeletal system develop in athletes after injuries, in the treatment of which the use of drugs may be 
limited.
Aim: study of the therapeutic effects of the preparation Traumeel S in the conditions of modeling the inflammatory process in experimental 
animals and in athletes with diseases of the musculoskeletal system of inflammatory genesis.
Patients and Methods: studies were carried out on white Wistar line rats with adjuvant arthritis model and in athletes with post-traumatic 
inflammation (bursitis, tendovaginitis, periarthritis). Dynamics of inflammatory process, immunocompetent and nociceptive systems at two-
week application of ointment form containing Traumeel S was analyzed.
Results: it was established that the experimental model of chronic inflammatory process (adjuvant arthritis) reproduces the main pathogenetic 
reactions of the disease, including suppression of the immune system, activation of biochemical pain markers (substances P and histamine) 
and reduction of the level of antinociceptive indices (serotonin and beta-endorphin). Course application of Traumeel S ointment leads to 
regression  of  inflammatory  process  (reduction  of  lower  limb  edema  in  experimental  animals,  reduction  of  leukocytosis),  reduction  of 
phagocytosis completion rate, as well as increase of serotonin and beta-endorphin production. Almost the same results were obtained in 
athletes with inflammation of the musculoskeletal system, with almost twofold decrease in pain syndrome. Simultaneously, the concentration 

12

РМЖ, 2019 № 2Хирургия
of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes decreased and natural killer cells increased. A decrease in pain syndrome was statistically significantly associated 
with an increase in serotonin and beta-endorphin production.
Conclusion:  complex  bioregulatory  drug  Traumeel  S  confirmed  its  clinical  efficacy  in  the  treatment  of  inflammatory  diseases  of  the 
musculoskeletal system in athletes and experimental simulation of joint inflammation in experimental animals.
Keywords: inflammatory process, musculoskeletal system, sportsmen, experimental animals, rats, bioregulatory drug Traumeel S, immune 
system, nociceptive system.
For citation: Zhernov V.A., Frolkov V.K., Zubarkina M.M., Agasarov L.G. Experimental and clinical justification of mechanisms of multi-purpose 
therapeutic action of a complex bioregulatory preparation. RMJ. 2019;2:12–15.