The role of thrombolytic and anticoagulant therapy in reducing the risk of chronic pulmonary hypertension after pulmonary embolism
M.R. Kuznetsov1,2, B.B. Orlov1, I.P. Marchenko2, A.A. Khotinsky1,3, L.A. Neskhodimov1

1Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow
2Bauman City Clinical Hospital No 29, Moscow
3First N.I. Pirogov City Clinical Hospital, Moscow

Aim: to determine the role of thrombolytic and anticoagulant therapy in reducing the risk of chronic pulmonary hypertension after PE.
Patients and Methods: 210 patients diagnosed with submassive and massive PE from 2013 to 2017 were included in the study. The control 
examination was conducted within 1 to 3 years after the initial hospitalization. Patients were divided into two groups: Group 1 was represent-
ed by 45 patients, in whom the control examination revealed signs of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH); the second 
group included 165 patients without CTEPH signs. To detect venous thrombosis in the inferior vena cava system ultrasound angioscanning 
was used, estimation of the degree of lung vascular lesion was carried out by means of multihelix computer tomoangiography and lung scin-
tigraphy, echocardiography was performed, and associated diseases were evaluated.
Results:  the  following  risk  factors  for  the  development  of  CTEPH  after  PE  were  revealed:  duration  of  thrombotic  anamnesis  (1  group 
13.70±2.05 days, 2 group 8.16±1.13 days, p=0.015), localization of venous thrombosis in the lower limbs (the most favorable — the veins of 
the thigh, popliteal vein and common femoral veins, unfavorable — the superficial femoral vein). The choice of the preparation for thrombo-
lytic and anticoagulant therapy: streptokinase and urokinase were much more effective than alteplase, Rivaroscaban surpassed the combi-

16

РМЖ, 2019 № 2Ангиология
nation of unfractionated or low molecular weight heparins with warfarin. Also risk factors for CTEPH were the initial degree of pulmonary 
hypertension and tricuspidal insufficiency, as well as the positive dynamics of these indicators against the background of thrombolytic or 
anticoagulant therapy.Among the concomitant diseases, the significant risk factors for the development of CTEPH were the diseases of the 
abdominal cavity, especially splenectomy, hypertension of the 3rd degree, diabetes mellitus, postinfarction cardiosclerosis. On the other hand, 
age, sex, severity at the moment of admission, presence of heart attack pneumonia, surgical prophylaxis of PE relapse, number of pregnancies 
and births in the history, traumatological and oncological history, heart rhythm disorders did not have a reliable influence on the possible 
development of CTEPH.
Conclusion: the results of the study allow to identify with a high degree of reliability the patients predisposed to the development of CTEPH 
after the PE, which creates the basis for the timely implementation of measures aimed at reducing the risk of this complication and improving 
the long-term results of PE treatment.
Keywords: pulmonary embolism, chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension, risk factors, predictors of development, streptokinase, 
urokinase, alteplase, warfarin, rivaroxaban, MDCT-angiography, lung scintigraphy, echocardiography.
For citation: Kuznetsov M.R., Orlov B.B., Marchenko I.P. et al. The role of thrombolytic and anticoagulant therapy in reducing the risk of 
chronic pulmonary hypertension after pulmonary embolism. RMJ. 2019;2:16–20.