Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of micronized polyenzymatic preparations in patients with chronic pancreatitis with exocrine pancreatic insuffi-
ciency
Minushkin O.N., Maslovsky L.V., Evsikov A.E.

Central State Medical Academy of the Administrative Department of the President of the Russian Federation, Moscow

Pancreatic exocrine insufficiency (PEI) is a consequence of pancreatic diseases associated with the loss of functioning parenchyma. Recently, there has been
an increase in the incidence of PEI. According to current guidelines, PEI treatment includes diet, enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) and the treatment of the
underlying  disease.  The  authors  conducted  an  open  non-comparative  study  of  the  efficacy  and  safety  of  the  modern  micronized  enzyme  drug
«Ermitale®» 36 000.
Aim of the study: to evaluate the effectiveness of treatment of PEI patients with the drug «Ermitale®» 36 000 in a dose of 1 capsule during a meal 3-4 times
a day, depending on the severity of PEI with the use of clinical, instrumental and laboratory parameters.
Patients and methods: The study included 20 patients with PEI chronic pancreatitis. The drug «Ermitale®» 36000 was administered depending on the data of
the elastase test. The appointment of other enzyme preparations was excluded. Before and after the treatment, ultrasound of the abdominal cavity, a hydro-
gen test, clinical and biochemical blood tests (total protein, albumin, cholesterol, triglycerides, prothrombin), coprogram, carbolenic test were performed. 
Results: The disappearance or significant decrease in the intensity of the symptoms of the disease was noted, laboratory and anthropometric indicators of
nutritional status were significantly improved, which was naturally accompanied by a significant improvement in the quality of life of patients. The used dos-
es of the drug depend on the degree of PEI. There are no significant complications of the treatment.

РМЖ, 2017 № 17

1225


Оригинальные статьи

Гастроэнтерология

Conclusions: «Ermitale®» is a drug that effectively suppresses PEI, that is indicated by: a positive dynamics of clinical indicators (absolute number of lym-
phocytes) and biochemical blood test (albumin, lipid profile, prothrombin), an increase in body mass index. The drug «Ermitale®» is safe to use and well tol-
erated.
Key words: pancreas, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, enzyme replacement therapy, «Ermitale®».
For citation: Minushkin O.N., Maslovsky L.V., Evsikov A.E. Evaluation of the efficacy and safety of micronized polyenzymatic preparations in patients with
chronic pancreatitis with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency // RMJ. 2017. № 17. P. 1225–1231.