A modern understanding of the role of sexually transmitted infections, in the development of urogenital pathology in men
Yu.Yu. Vinnik

Krasnoyarsk State Medical University named after prof. V.F. Voino-Yasenetsky

The article highlights the modern concepts of the role of sexually transmitted infection in the development of urogenital pathology in men: 
inflammation of urethra, additional genital glands and scrotum organs. Despite numerous studies on their prevention and treatment, it has not 
yet been possible to reduce these diseases due to their tendency to chronic relapsing current. The variety of subjective and objective symptoms 
associated with urethral lesions, glandular supplements and scrotal organs makes diagnosis difficult, and common clinical and laboratory 
methods do not always confirm the presence of inflammatory processes.
Infectious agents affecting the urogenital tract and their role in the determination of the inflammatory process are still under discussion. The 
most common complication of sexually transmitted infection in men of reproductive age is chronic prostatitis. Historical, epidemiological 
and etiological aspects of the disease are examined. One of the priority theories of prostatitis development is penetration into the prostate of 
urinary tract infection.
The  argument  in  favour  of  the  infectious  theory  is  the  detection  of  E.  coli,  Klebsiella,  Proteus,  Serratia,  C.  trachomatis,  T.  vaginalis,  
M. genitalium and other microorganisms in prostate tissue and secretion. In addition, the article, along with other diagnostic methods, gives 
a detailed description of the highly informative complex of the study of microflora of the urogenital tract by molecular-biological method with 
the quantitative determination of microorganisms.
Keywords: sexually transmitted infections, prostatitis, urogenital tract, molecular-biological method.
For citation: Vinnik Yu.Yu. A modern understanding of the role of sexually transmitted infections, in the development of urogenital pathology 
in men. RMJ. 2019;2:32–38.