Consequences of excessive fibrosis formation in patients with chronic prostatitis
P.N. Filimonov1, E.V. Kulchavenya1,2

1Novosibirsk Scientific Research Institute of Tuberculosis
2Novosibirsk State Medical University

One of the reasons for chronic recurrent prostatitis is the hyperproduction of fibrous tissue. Tissue sclerosis aggravates the clinical picture of 
prostatitis and reduces the effectiveness of treatment.
Aim:  to  determine  the  influence  of  the  degree  of  severity  of  inflammatory  phenomena  and  prostate  fibrosis  on  urodynamics  and  local 
microcirculation.
Patients and Methods: an open, retrospective case-control comparative study included 18 patients who had been biopsied by a prostate 
biopsy. Indicators of urofluometry and the degree of microcirculation disorder were compared between the group of patients with severe 
fibrosis (the 1st group, 9 people) and the 2nd group (also 9 patients) — with insignificant fibrosis changes of the prostate gland. The degree 
of fibrosis and inflammation was indicated: from 0 (no change) to 3 points (expressed changes).
Results:  structural  changes  in  the  prostate  gland  were  revealed  in  all  of  them  according  to  the  ultrasound  examination  data,  mainly  — 
echogenic heterogeneity, regions of increased and decreased echodensity. In the 1st group, the degree of fibrosis averaged 2.7 points, and the 
degree of inflammation — 2.5 points. In the 2nd group fibrosis and inflammation were insignificant: 0.2 and 0.3 points, respectively. Urination 
indexes in the 1st group were 1.5 times worse than in the 2nd group, and microcirculation indexes were 1.7 times worse than in the 2nd group.
Conclusion: chronic prostatitis complicated by excessive development of fibrous tissue leads to statistically significant deterioration of urinary 
parameters and local microcirculation. The degree of microcirculation disorder and urodynamics indirectly indicates the level of prostate fibrosis.
Keywords: chronic prostatitis, fibrosis, hardening, impaired microcirculation, impaired urodynamics.
For  citation:  Filimonov  P.N.,  Kulchavenya  E.V.  Consequences  of  excessive  fibrosis  formation  in  patients  with  chronic  prostatitis.  RMJ. 