Place of ursodeoxycholic acid in the therapy of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease at different stages: steatosis, steatohepatitis, fibrosis / cirrhosis
Kazyulin A.N.

Moscow State Medical Stomatological University named after А.I. Evdokimov
Central Clinical Hospital No.2 named after N.A. Semashko of Russian Railways, Moscow

In the last quarter of a century, epidemiological studies have shown a steady increase in the incidence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in all coun-
tries of the world among various population groups, including adolescents and children. NAFLD is described as a pathological condition characterized by a
significant lipid deposition in hepatocytes or liver parenchyma in patients who have no history of alcohol abuse.
The review provides the latest relevant data on the development, course and diagnostics of NAFLD. Much attention is paid to the methods of primary and sec-
ondary prevention of the disease. The purpose of therapeutic measures in NAFLD is to prevent the development of steatosis, by affecting the modifiable risk
factors, and in case of its presence to prevent the outcome of steatosis in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma by using the
secondary prevention methods.
Particular attention is paid to the use of preparations of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA). The accumulated experimental and clinical data show that UDCA is
a drug of pleiotropic action, which is expressed in its multifactorial effect on the liver. In turn, the drug of choice is Urdoksa (AF Obolenskoe, Russia), which
is produced in accordance with GMP criteria, and has a proven pharmaceutical equivalence and bioequivalence with leading UDCA drugs.
Key words: non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, non-alcoholic steatosis of the liver, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, preventive measures, ursodeoxycholic acid, Urdoksa.
For citation: Kazyulin A.N.Place of ursodeoxycholic acid in the therapy of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease at different stages: steatosis, steatohepatitis, fi-
brosis / cirrhosis // RMJ. 2017. № 17. P. 1248–1257.