Analysis of psychological disorders in patients with localized prostate cancer
V.A. Solodkii, A.Yu. Pavlov, A.D. Tsybulskiy, A.G. Dzizaria, R.A. Gafanov, A.S. Pchelintsev

Russian Research Center of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Moscow

Aim: to assess the degree of psychological changes in patients with localized prostate cancer (PC) against the background of treatment.
Patients  and  Methods:  patients  with  localized  PC  who  are  under  treatment  in  the  Russian  Research  Center  of  Radiology  and  Nuclear 
Medicine were divided into 2 groups. The 1st group — 58 patients with localized PC who received treatment in the volume of standard 6-field 
photon irradiation. The 2nd group — 49 patients with localized PC who received SLT treatment (brachytherapy followed by photon radiation 
therapy). Psychopathological abnormalities were determined by independent completion of the AMS self-report questionnaire (Aging Males’ 
Symptoms) by the patients before and after the complex treatment (in 3, 6, 12 months).
Results:  the  number  of  patients  with  symptoms  of  irritability  and  depression  reached  50%  on  admission  to  the  clinic.  Nervousness 
(anxiety) was even more frequent (75% of cases). After 3 months of complex treatment psychopathological symptoms increased in both 
groups: nervousness 79.3% and 55.1%, symptoms of depression 58.6% and 48.9% in the 1st and 2nd groups respectively. After 6 months 
of treatment, irritability was the same in both groups, nervousness (55.2%) and anxiety (32.7% and 18.4%) were more frequent in 1st 
group than in 2nd group, symptoms of depression were observed in 1st group in 50% of men, in 2nd group in 32.6%. After 12 months 
the symptoms of nervousness, anxiety and depression were observed more often in the I group of patients during the whole period of 
observation (p<0.05).
Conclusion: it was found that anxiety-depression disorders were most frequent in 1st group, which is associated with a greater number of 
complications in the post-treatment period compared to 2nd group.
Keywords: prostate cancer, brachytherapy, depression, anxiety, nervousness, psychological disorders.
For  citation:  Solodkii  V.A.,  Pavlov  A.Yu.,  Tsybulskiy  A.D.  et  al.  Analysis  of  psychological  disorders  in  patients  with  localized  prostate 
cancer. RMJ. 2019;2:52–55.