Ischemic preconditioning of myocardium in patients with coronary artery disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus: the 
experience of using nicorandil
Zh.M. Sizova, V.L. Zaharova, N.V. Kozlova

Sechenov University, Moscow

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a complex of disorders caused by known risk factors and concomitant diseases that can affect 
the development of ischemic injuries and the severity of the response to cardioprotective interventions. Ischemic preconditioning 
(IP) of the myocardium is considered as the gold standard of cardioprotection. The ability of drugs to initiate IP processes and 
protect the myocardium from possible future injuries, especially in patients with CAD with concomitant type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(DM2), deserves special attention.
Aim:  to  evaluate  comparatively  the  possibilities  of  coronary  reserve  pharmacological  correction  and  effect  on  IP  of  the 
myocardium in patients with CAD and DM2 with traditional nitro-based preparations and the activator of potassium channels, 
nicorandil.
Patients and Methods: 54 patients with stable angina pectoris of 2–3 functional classes (FC) and DM2 were under study. Dynamics 
of the frequency of angina pectoris attacks, angina pectoris middle FC, exercise tolerance and Holter ECG monitoring under the 
effect of 24-week therapy with nicorandil, isosorbide dinitrate (ISDN) and isosorbide-5-mononitrate (I5MN) were analyzed.

12

РМЖ, 2018 № 11 (I)КардиологияОригинальные статьи
Results: therapy with nicorandil, ISDN and I5MN for 12 weeks leads to a significant decrease in the number of attacks per week, 
a decrease of the middle angina pectoris FC, an increase in exercise tolerance and a reduction in the number of episodes of pain 
and painless myocardial ischemia with some bonus of nitrates over nicorandil. With continued treatment for up to 24 weeks, an 
increase in antianginal and anti-ischemic efficacy is observed only in the nicorandil group.
Conclusion: in patients with CAD and DM2, the selected drug for long-term therapy is nicorandil, which is more effective than 
traditional nitro-based drugs and has the ability to initiate IP of the miocardium. Nicorandil effectively corrects endothelial 
dysfunction,  without  causing  the  development  of  tolerance  and  without  reducing  its  effectiveness  while  simultaneous 
administration of glucose-lowering therapy.
Key words: coronary artery disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, ischemic preconditioning, endothelial dysfunction, nicorandil, 
Cordinik.
For  citation:  Sizova  Zh.M.,  Zaharova  V.L.,  Kozlova  N.V.  Ischemic  preconditioning  of  myocardium  in  patients  with  coronary 
artery disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus: the experience of using nicorandil // RMJ. 2018. № 11(I). P. 12–17.