Treatment efficiency of arrhythmias of immune-inflammatory genesis by plasmapheresis
V.A. Kulikova1, A.V. Nedostup1, O.V. Blagova1, V.A. Zaydenov2, A.G. Kupriyanova3, I.A Nechaev4, A.A. Ragimov4

1 Sechenov University, Moscow
2 Shumakov National Medical Research Center of Transplantology and Artificial Organs, Moscow
3 Veltishchev Research Clinical Institute of Pediatrics, Moscow
4 Sechenov University Blood Center, Moscow

Aim:  to  study  the  effectiveness  of  plasmapheresis  as  the  main  type  of  pathogenetic  treatment  or  in  combination  with 
immunosuppressive therapy in patients with arrhythmias of immune-inflammatory genesis.
Patients and Methods: 48 patients with an arrhythmic variant of myocarditis (with supraventricular/ventricular premature 
beats, atrial fibrillation) were included in the study. The inclusion criterion was an increase in ≥2 times of titers of at least  

18

РМЖ, 2018 № 11 (I)КардиологияОригинальные статьи
2 types of anti-cardiac antibodies. Myocarditis was diagnosed using myocardial biopsy, coronary angiography, a non-invasive 
diagnostic algorithm including anamnestic data, magnetic resonance imaging and multispiral computed tomography of the 
heart,  myocardial  scintigraphy.  All  patients  underwent  standard  cardiotropic  and  anti-arrhythmic  therapy.  An  additional 
course of discrete plasmapheresis was performed in 22 patients (the main group) with the removal of the thrombo-leukocyte 
layer and the total circulating plasma volume. The remaining 26 patients entered the experimental group. Dynamics of clinical 
and laboratory parameters were evaluated after 6 and 12 months.
Results: in the plasmapheresis group, a significant decrease in anti-cardiac antibody titers was observed immediately after 
plasmapheresis and during control studies (p<0.05). A good clinical response (decrease in the number of extrasystoles and 
atrial fibrillation frequency ≥75%) was observed in 81.2% of patients of the plasmapheresis group and 57.7% of the experimental 
group. In 32% of patients of the main group, it was possible to completely cancel the anti-arrhythmic therapy due to the persistent 
suppression of myocarditis activity, which was not achieved in the experimental group. The most significant effect was observed 
in patients with ventricular premature beats. The good response of plasmapheresis was associated with a shorter duration of the 
disease and younger patients. The predictor of plasmapheresis efficiency was the titer of a specific antinuclear factor (antibodies 
to  the  nuclei  of  cardiomyocytes)  1:40-1:80  and  more.  More  aggressive  therapy  of  myocarditis  with  methylprednisolone  in 
patients of the main group was conducted significantly less frequently (46%) than in patients of the experimental group (73%), 
p<0.05. Methylprednisolone doses were also lower in the plasmapheresis patient group than in the experimental group (7[3.5; 
16] vs. 16[10; 24] mg per day, respectively, p=0.055).
Conclusion: good clinical response to plasmapheresis was observed in 81.8% of patients with arrhythmias of immune-inflammatory 
genesis. In patients with the arrhythmic variant of myocarditis, plasmapheresis conduction increases the effectiveness of anti-
arrhythmic and immunosuppressive therapy and makes it possible to refrain from aggressive immunosuppression regimens.
Key  words:  myocarditis,  ventricular  premature  beats,  supraventricular  premature  beats,  atrial  fibrillation,  plasmapheresis, 
immunosuppressive therapy.
For citation: Kulikova V.A., Nedostup A.V., Blagova O.V. et al. Treatment efficiency of arrhythmias of immune-inflammatory 
genesis by plasmapheresis // RMJ. 2018. № 11(I). P. 18–26.