Optimization of the treatment of edema syndrome in patients with chronic heart failure
A.G. Yevdokimova, E.V. Kovalenko, V.V. Yevdokimov, I.M. Mikhailova

A.I. Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry

The  article  considers  the  mechanisms  of  the  fluid  retention  syndrome  in  patients  with  chronic  heart  failure  (CHF).  The 
classification of diuretics is given depending on the points of application of their action in the nephron. Particular attention 
is  paid  to  the  negative  role  of  hyperaldosteronism  in  CHF  and  the  possibility  of  its  control  when  using  torasemide  and 
eplerenone. Based on numerous, multicenter clinical studies, the advantage of using a loop diuretic with an antialdosterone 
effect — torasemide and an antagonist of mineral corticoid receptors — eplerenone in the complex therapy of CHF is shown. It 
is emphasized that after intaking the initial dose of torasemide, diuretic and antihypertensive effects appear immediately, and 
the antifibrotic effect requires a certain time, which is due to a change in collagen occurring during 6-9 months of continuous 
drug therapy. In connection with this, it is necessary to take into account the long-term, sometimes lifelong, use of torasemide 
in the management of patients with CHF, arterial hypertension and defeat of target organs. The article presents data, within the 
framework of evidence-based medicine, on the high clinical efficacy of eplerenone in patients with CHF and a reduced ejection 
fraction with or without myocardial infarction. Thus, the use of torasemide and eplerenone helps not only to improve the quality 
of life of serious patients, but also the prognosis.
Key words: chronic heart failure, edema syndrome, torasemide, Trigrim, eplerenone, Espiro.
For  citation:  Yevdokimova  A.G.,  Kovalenko  E.V.,  Yevdokimov  V.V.,  Mikhailova  I.M.  Optimization  of  the  treatment  of  edema 
syndrome in patients with chronic heart failure // RMJ. 2018. № 11(I). P. 47–53.