The efficacy, safety, and background as the basis of selection of antihypertensive drug in terms of current trends in the 
hypertension treatment
S.R. Gilyarevsky1, M.V. Golsсhmid1, I.M. Kuzmina2, I.I. Sinitcina1

1 Russian Medical Academy of Continuing Professional Education, Moscow
2 Sklifosovsky Scientific Research Institute of First Aid, Moscow

The  article  discusses  the  up-to-date  requirements  for  antihypertensive  drugs  in  relation  to  the  adoption  of  new 
recommendations on the therapeutic approach of patients with hypertension. This article represents the evidence base of 
the effective administration of angiotensin receptor blocker, candesartan. The selection algorithm of the antihypertensive 
drug  in  patients  with  hypertension  and  the  efficacy  of  candesartan  in  case  of  hypertension  and  pre-hypertension  are 
described. Special attention is given to the probative effectiveness of candesartan administration in patients with chronic 
cardiac insufficiency. In addition, there are pharmacological characteristics of the drug, contributing to its high clinical 
effectiveness. In light of new clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of patients with hypertension, they can be the 
basis for revision of the optimal antihypertensive drugs or components of antihypertensive therapy. Taking into account the 
evidence data on the effectiveness and safety of candesartan administration, it can be considered that this drug establishes 
itself as a leading choice both among renin-angiotensin system blockers and antihypertensive drugs, as a whole. Clinically 
significant benefits of candesartan were confirmed during the conduction of a large number of randomized clinical trials. 
The administration of candesartan in patients with hypertension and chronic cardiac insufficiency leads to the prognosis 
improvement.
Key words: hypertension, chronic cardiac insufficiency, clinical practice guidelines, treatment of hypertension, angiotensin 
receptor blockers, candesartan, Hyposart.
For citation: Gilyarevsky S.R., Golsсhmid M.V., Kuzmina I.M., Sinitcina I.I. The efficacy, safety, and background as the basis of 
selection of antihypertensive drug in terms of current trends in the hypertension treatment // RMJ. 2018. № 11(I). P. 59–64.