Zinc in the complex therapy of diffuse alopecia
Olisova O.Yu., Gostroverhova I.P., Lepyokhova A.A.

First Moscow State Medical University named after I.M. Sechenov

Alopecia is a pathological hair loss. Non-scarring alopecia include diffuse alopecia (DA), androgenetic and focal alopecia.
The aim of the study: evaluation of the effectiveness of dietary supplement Zinkit in the complex therapy of DA.
Patients and Methods: 32 female patients aged from 18 to 65 years with DA were observed. Patients were divided into two groups - the main group (n=16)
and controlgroup (n=16). Both groups received complex therapy, including antioxidants, drugs for improving microcirculation, multivitamins and peptide
containing serum for topical application. Patients of the main group additionally used zinc containing "Zinkit " by one tablet (10 mg of zinc) 2 times a day
during meals, dissolved in 200 ml of water, for 3 months. The efficacy of the therapy was assessed by questioning patients (reduce of the hair loss intensity)
and trichoscopy before therapy and after two months. Phototrichogram (FTG) was performed for an objective evaluation of the effectiveness of the therapy.
As a result of the therapy, all patients of the main and control groups had a positive effect. In the main group 9 women (56.25%) noticed a significant im-
provement; 4 women (25%) - improvement; 3 women (18.75%) - a slight improvement: in the control group, 5 women (31.25%) had a significant improvement,
6 (37.5%) - improvement, 5 (31.25%) – a slight improvement. After the therapy, the trichoscopic and FTG results improved in both groups.
Conclusion: zinc containing "Zinkit" as a part of complex therapy of DA helps to reduce the intensity of hair loss, providing hair thickening and growth. All
patients noted good tolerability of "Zinkit".
Key words: alopecia, diffuse alopecia, trichoscopy, phototrichogram, zinc.
For citation: Olisova O.Yu., Gostroverhova I.P., Lepyokhova A.A. Zinc in the complex therapy of diffuse alopecia // RMJ. 2017. № 25. P. 1876–1879.