Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: features of pathogenesis and treatment
Zvenigorodskaya L.A.1, Mkrtumyan A.M.1, 2, Nilova T.V.1, Shinkin M.V.1, Petrakov A.V.1

1 Moscow Clinical Scientific and Practical Center
2 Moscow State Medical Stomatological University named after A.I. Evdokimov

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is one of the most common diseases in hepatology. The disease occurs in 85-90% of patients with diabetes melli-
tus (DM). In the pathogenesis of NAFLD an important role is played by taurine deficiency.
The aim of the study was to determine the content of bile acids (BAs) in the blood in patients with NAFLD and type 2 diabetes; to evaluate the effect of in-
flammation markers, malonic dialdehyde (MDA) on the synthesis and transport of BAs; to analyze the indices of NO and endotoxin metabolites, biochemical
indicators of blood, during three months of taurine therapy.
Patients and methods: 158 patients with NAFLD were examined, and 46 patients with type 2 DM, with impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) - 112. A double-blind
placebo-controlled study included 40 patients with NAFLD and type 2 diabetes. Patients were divided into two groups. The main group received taurine, the
control group received placebo. 
Results of the study: in patients with NAFLD without carbohydrate metabolism disorder the content of BAs in serum was 5.4 ± 1.8 μmol / L. In patients with NAFLD
with IGT it was 8.88 ± 4.94 μmol / l. In 59 patients with NAFLD and type 2 DM the content of BAs was significantly decreased by 45%. The lipid peroxidation indices
in patients with NAFLD and type 2 DM were increased by 2 times. The endotoxin content in the blood serum of the NAFLD group and type 2 diabetes was 12 times
higher as compared to the control group. The level of NO metabolites in patients with NAFLD and type 2 DM before treatment with taurine was increased by 6.8 times.
After treatment - their content decreased by 44%. Treatment with taurine was accompanied by an improvement in the biochemical parameters of the blood.
Conclusion: the obtained results prove the anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, detoxifying and membrane-stabilizing effect of taurine in patients with NAFLD
and type 2 DM.
Key words: non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, bile acids, nitric oxide, endotoxin, taurine, complex drug treatment.
For citation: Zvenigorodskaya L.A., Mkrtumyan A.M., Nilova T.V. et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: features of
pathogenesis and treatment // RMJ. 2017. № 22. P. 1607–1612.