Calcium dobesilate as an early angioprotector in diabetic microangiopathies
Murashko E.Yu.

The multidisciplinary clinical diagnostic center «Clinic TrastMed», Moscow

Microangiopathies are the most common complications in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM). Often in connection with the late diagnosis of diabetes, a large
number of patients already have both micro- and macrovascular complications. The most common and extremely disabling complication of diabetes is dia-
betic retinopathy. The pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy has a multifactor character and includes a change in the vascular wall, which leads to an increase
in the permeability and fragility of blood vessels, a violation of blood circulation in the retina with the formation of microbleedings and occlusions and, as a
result, leads to neovascularization and retinal fibrosis with the formation of secondary neovascular glaucoma and the risk of retinal detachment. Calcium
dobesilate with a proven pronounced angioprotective activity is successfully used for the treatment and prevention of microangiopathies in DM. Its effect is
based on reducing the permeability of the vascular wall, inhibiting the apoptosis of cells that prevents changes the membrane permeability, and DNA frag-
mentation, as well as adhesion of leukocytes to the walls of the retinal vessels and endotheliocytes and normalization of the level of proteins, which ultimately
helps to maintain integrity hematoretinal barrier. Similarly, calcium dobesilate suppresses lipid peroxidation, reduces platelet aggregation and reduces the
level of fibrinogen, thereby positively affecting the rheological properties of the blood. According to studies, the early appointment of calcium dobesilate pro-
vides both an angioprotective effect with respect to diabetic angiopathies (including diabetic nephropathy and diabetic polyneuropathy), and the regression
of already existing microvascular complications. 
Key words: calcium dobesilate, microangiopathy, angioprotection, diabetic retinopathy, diabetic nephropathy, polyneuropathy.
For citation: Murashko E.Yu. Calcium dobesilate as an early angioprotector in diabetic microangiopathies // RMJ. 2017. № 22. P. 1629–1634.