Treatment of neurotic disorders in children
Khachatryan L.G.1, Bykova O.V.2, Nikitina E.D.2, Kasanabe E.V.1

1 I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University
2 University Children Hospital of the I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University

The paper discusses an important issue of pediatric psychoneurology, the treatment of neurotic disorders. The occurrence of these conditions among func-
tional outcomes of perinatal hypoxia is 35-40%. Statistical data demonstrate low efficacy of pharmacotherapy for these conditions. This results in the reduced
quality of life of a child and a family.
Aim. To assess the efficacy of various medical agents in the treatment of neurotic and emotional disorders.
Patients and methods. The efficacy of Nervoheel®, Valerianaheel®, and Phenibut was compared in 131 children aged 3-12 years with neurotic disorders.
Results. It was demonstrated that each agent has its own “application point” depending on the composition and mechanism of action. Thus, the most effec-
tive drug in terms of emotional improvement was Nervoheel® which also increased motivation (like Phenibut) and communication. The medications were sim-
ilarly effective for sleep disorders in 44.2-52.3% of children. In addition to high efficacy, complex homeopathies have good tolerability: self-limiting allergic
reactions to Nervoheel® and Valerianaheel® observed in 2 patients only were regarded as homeopathic “exacerbation”. On the other hand, abdominal pains
and allergic skin reactions were detected in 11 patients who received Phenibut. Moreover, 18.6% of children prescribed with Nervoheel® and 20.5% of chil-
dren prescribed with Valerianaheel® demonstrates somatic (i.e., gastrointestinal and excretory) improvements.
Conclusions. Nervoheel® and Valerianaheel® are safe and effective for neurological and emotional disorders in children. They can be recommended for wide-
spread use in pediatric daily practice.
Key words: functional disorders of nervous system, neurotic disorders, Nervoheel®, Valerianaheel®, Phenibut.
For citation: Khachatryan L.G., Bykova O.V., Nikitina E.D., Kasanabe E.V. Treatment of neurotic disorders in children // RMJ. 2016. № 24. P. 1634–1638.