The choice of proton pump inhibitor in the eradication therapy of Нelicobacter pylori infection. Maastricht V
Kazyulin A.N., Goncharenko A.Yu.

Moscow State Medical Stomatological University named after А.I. Evdokimov

The review is devoted to one of the main problems in gastroenterology - the choice of proton pump inhibitor (PPI) in order to increase the effectiveness of erad-
ication therapy of Helicobacter pylori. Based on the analysis of the results of experimental and clinical studies, it has been concluded that rabeprazole has a
number of distinctive features among the other PPIs that determine the high feasibility of its choice for successful eradication therapy. Among them - the max-
imum effect after the first intake; the dose of rabeprazole is lower in comparison with the doses of other PPIs (the highest pharmacological activity); rabepra-
zole reliably suppresses the secretion of hydrochloric acid, because its destruction in the liver does not depend on the presence of polymorphisms of the
cytP450 gene, and the effects of rabeprazole are predictable; rabeprazole is safe for patients taking several drugs at the same time; rabeprazole has a num-
ber of pleiotropic effects. The lower cost of generics compared to the cost of the original drug has always been an important reason for their appointment,
but they do not always have the proper biological, pharmaceutical and therapeutic equivalence to the original drug. At present, doctors and their patients are
offered the Razo® generic rabeprazole produced by Dr Reddy’s®, which combines the high clinical efficacy of the original drug, safety of use, economic ac-
cessibility and high production culture in accordance with GMP criteria, registered FDA in the "Orange Book" in the AB category.
Key words: H. pylori eradication, proton pump inhibitors, rabeprazole, generic, Razo®.
For citation: Kazyulin A.N., Goncharenko A.Yu. The choice of proton pump inhibitor in the eradication therapy of Helicobacter pylori infection. Maastricht V //
RMJ. 2017. № 10. P. 712–717.