Algorithm for managing patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Roman criteria IV
Maev Maev I.V.1, Cheryomushkin S.V.1,2, Kucheryavy Yu.A.1, Cheryomushkina N.V.1

1 Moscow State Medical Stomatological University named after А.I. Evdokimov
2 Central Clinical Hospital of Russian Railways named after N.A. Semashko

Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) is a recurrent functional disorder of the gastrointestinal tract, the diagnosis of which remains exclusively clinical. The arti-
cle thoroughly examines the Roman criteria IV, which were published in 2016 and included a number of fundamentally important differences from the previ-
ous version. In the etiopathogenesis of IBS the main role is played by socioeconomic status, genetic predisposition, psychological aspects, visceral hyper-
sensitivity, gastrointestinal motility disorders (GMD), changes in the neuroendocrine system, low-grade inflammation, the concept of post-infection IBS, the
imbalance of the microbiota, and, finally, various nutritional factors. The multicomponent nature of the causes and mechanisms of IBS formation play a role
also in other functional diseases of the digestive tract, which can lead to a cross-functional pathology in the same patient. As a consequence, the treatment
of IBS patients remains a very difficult task, and relapse of the disease depends on the state of the psychoemotional sphere, the presence of comorbidity and
the "cross" syndrome. The use of Iberogast ® significantly improved the quality of life of patients with IBS and significantly affected the pain abdominal syn-
drome, reducing it. The accumulated experience of using Iberogast in the treatment of IBS made it possible to include it in the latest Russian clinical guide-
lines "Irritable Bowel Syndrome."
Key words: irritable bowel syndrome, Iberogast®, Roman criteria IV, functional gastrointestinal diseases.
For citation: Maev I.V., Cheryomushkin S.V., Kucheryavy Yu.A., Cheryomushkina N.V. Algorithm for managing patients with irritable bowel syndrome. Roman
criteria IV // RMJ. 2017. № 10. P. 718–722.