Preliminary results of Russian open-label multicenter study MINERVA (Milgamma for neurological disorders and pain syndromes)
Barinov A.N.1,2, Makhinov K.A.2, Komarova O.A.2

1 I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University
2 Academy of Interventional Medicine, Moscow

Background. Vitamins B for the disorders not associated with vitamin deficiency (i.e., peripheral nerve disorders and pain syndromes) have gained a great
popularity in Russia. The aim of Russian open-label multicenter study MINERVA was to assess satisfaction and compliance of neurotropic therapy with Mil-
gamma® and Milgamma® compositum regarding approved indications for their use and clinical guidelines for the treatment of these conditions.
Material and methods. Statistical analysis of data from 33 medical centers on 1203 outpatients with various pain syndromes and/or neurological disorders
was performed. 51% of patients received Milgamma® for dorsalgia and other musculoskeletal pains while diabetic neuropathies and mononeuropathies
ranked 2nd and 3rd, respectively. In all conditions, practitioners rated the efficacy of Milgamma® as “good” in 51%, “satisfactory” in 45%, and “unsatisfac-

1650

РМЖ, 2016 № 24


Неврология

Клиническая фармакология

tory” in 4%. The evaluation of treatment by Milgamma® was lower if treatment course was less than 4 weeks. Adverse effects (hyperemia, allergic reactions)
were observed in 0.3% of patients who received injections or step therapy for dorsalgia.
Results. The analysis revealed a number of medical errors when prescribing neurotropic therapy. 10% of practitioners used Milgamma® in injections irra-
tionally (i.e., for local injections). 12% of practitioners prescribed more than 2 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs simultaneously. 27% of practitioners di-
agnosed dorsalgia incorrectly (osteochondrosis was verified in 10.5% of patients). Neurological complications of alcoholism were underdiagnosed. Monother-
apy was prescribed in 50% of conditions which required complex treatment. 70% of practitioners were unfamiliar with oncogenic effects of B12 while 30%
were unfamiliar with the temperature storage of injective B vitamins.
Conclusions. Preliminary data of MINERVA demonstrate high adherence of Russian practitioners to neurotropic therapy with B vitamins which sometimes
goes beyond the scope of approved indications. Medical retraining is required in more than a half of practitioners to correct misconceptions of pain causes
and algorithms of pharmacotherapy prescription.
Key words: pain syndromes, neuropathies, Milgamma®, Milgamma® compositum, MINERVA, clinical guidelines.
For citation: Barinov A.N., Makhinov K.A., Komarova O.A. Preliminary results of Russian open-label multicenter study MINERVA (Milgamma for neurologi-
cal disorders and pain syndromes) // RMJ. 2016. № 24. P. 1650–1656.