Clinical and functional parameters, nitric oxide content and peculiarities of induced sputum in combination of asthma and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Chubarova S.V.1,2, Sobko Е.А.1,2, Demko I.V.1,2, Soloveva A.A.1, Мineeva Е.S.1, Кublik Е.S.1

1 Krasnoyarsk State Medical University named after Prof. V.F.Voino-Yasenetsky
2 Regional clinical hospital, Krasnoyarsk

Aim:  To  study  the  clinical  and  functional  parameters,  the  content  of  exhaled  nitric  oxide  and  peculiarities  of  the  cellular 
composition of induced sputum in patients with a combination of asthma and COPD.
Patients and Methods: The study enrolled 57 respondents, which were divided into 3 groups. The first group included 20 patients with 
asthma, the second group included 19 patients with a combination of asthma and COPD, the third group consisted of 19 patients with 
COPD. All patients underwent a general clinical study, evaluation of the functional state of the respiratory system using the methods 
of spirography and body plethysmography, the study of the cell composition of induced sputum and the content of exhaled nitric oxide.
Results: According to the data obtained, the level of exhaled NO is much higher in the patients with the combination of asthma and COPD 
and is associated with the number of exacerbations of the disease (r = 0.60, p = 0.022), which indicates a high degree of inflammation 
in the bronchial tree. The analysis of cytograms of induced sputum indicates the formation of eosinophilic type of inflammation in 
asthma, neutrophilic — in COPD. The combination of asthma and COPD is characterized by the violation of physiological ratios of 

4

РМЖ, 2018 №3(I)Болезни дыхательных путей
individual cell populations in induced sputum in the direction of increasing the number of eosinophils and neutrophils, which indicates 
a mixed pattern of inflammation and correlates with the increase in the basic treatment (r=0,70, p=0,021).
Conclusion:  The  combination  of  asthma  and  COPD  is  characterized  by  a  more  severe  course  of  the  disease,  low  rates  of 
respiratory function, hyperinflation, and a high level of exhaled NO compared with the patients with severe asthma. The cellular 
composition of induced sputum testifies of the eosinophilic type of inflammation in asthma, neutrophilic type in COPD and 
mixed type in the combination of asthma and COPD.
Key words: bronchial asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, induced sputum, exhaled nitric oxide, inflammation.
For citation: Chubarova S.V., Sobko Е.А., Demko I.V. et al. Clinical and functional parameters, nitric oxide content and peculiarities 
of induced sputum in combination of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease // RMJ. 2018. № 3(I). P. 4–8.