Influence of bioregulatory drugs on the quality of life of patients with chronic obstructive lung disease
Dolinina L.Yu.
North-western State Medical University named after I. I. Mechnikov, St. Petersburg
The quality of life (QOL) of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease is currently one of the leading criteria for assessing 
the effectiveness of therapy. QOL indicator is closely related to health, and it is one of the key concepts of modern medicine, used 
for a deep multi-dimensional analysis of important components of human health in accordance with WHO criteria.
Aim: to study the quality of life of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) on the background of basic 
therapy and in combination with basic therapy with bioregulatory drugs, to analyze the cytological structure of sputum and 
bronchial washings, levels of inflammatory mediators in sputum and serum before and after treatment.
Patients and Methods: all patients (168 patients, including 90 patients with COPD and CAD) were divided into two groups: the 
main group (60 patients) received the basic COPD therapy and bioregulatory drugs, the control group (108 patients) received 
only basic therapy. The quality of life was assessed using the SF-36 questionnaire.
Results: In the group of patients who received bioregulatory agents against the background of basic therapy, there was a significant 
improvement in the indices of QOL on all scales characterizing both physical and psychological components of health. In both 
groups, there was a tendency to a decrease in the number of macrophages and eosinophils in sputum and bronchial washings. In the 
main group, the percentage of neutrophil content in sputum decreased significantly. In the second group, there was a tendency to  
a decrease in the level of macrophages and eosinophils in the bronchial washings. A decrease in the level of IL-8 and TNF-α in sputum 
was observed in all patients (p <0.005). In the main group, the level of γ-INF in sputum, as well as γ-INF and TNF-α in the bronchial 
washings, significantly decreased. In the control group, there was a significant decrease in the level of IL-8 in bronchial washings.

26

РМЖ, 2018 №3(I)Болезни дыхательных путей
After treatment, there was a significant decrease in the C-reactive serum protein and γ-INF in both groups. In the main group 
there was also a significant (p <0.005) decrease in ESR.
Conclusion: the study has showed, that bioregulatory drugs (Lymphomyosot, Mucosa compositum, Coenzyme compositum, 
Traumel C) complement and enhance the anti-inflammatory effect of basic treatment, which affects the quality of life of patients.
Key words: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, inflammation, quality of life, bioregulatory medications.
For  citation:  Dolinina L.Yu.  Influence  of  bioregulatory  drugs  on  the  quality  of  life  of  patients  with  chronic  obstructive  lung 
disease // RMJ. 2018. № 3(I). P. 26–29.