Antagonists of the mineralocorticoid receptor in the treatment of patients with chronic heart failure and myocardial infarction: a modern approach to an
old problem
Skvortsov A. A.

Russian Cardiology Research-and-Production Complex, Moscow

Mineralocorticoid receptors antagonists (MCRA) have been used by clinicians in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) for almost 60 years. Initially,
MCRAs were used exclusively as potassium-sparing diuretics, as a means of supplementing active diuretic therapy in patients with severe chronic heart fail-
ure (CHF). The discovery of mineralocorticoid receptors not only in the kidneys, but also in the heart, endothelium and smooth muscle cells of peripheral ves-
sels, other organs and tissues, and the recognition of aldosterone as one of the key hormones of the cardiovascular system (CCC) formed the basis for orga-
nizing a number of large-scale clinical projects in patients with CHF and acute myocardial infarction (AMI). The RALES study showed for the first time how
important it was to control adequately the activity of aldosterone in CHF, but this clinical study had a number of limitations and shortcomings, and there were
many unsolved issues after its completion. EPHESUS and EMPHASIS-HF studies have shown that the addition of MCRA to the standard therapy with an ACE
inhibitor and a beta-blocker additionally improves the clinical course and prognosis for the  patients with CHF and MI complicated by HF phenomena, and
this combination is currently recommended for the treatment of patients with HF and a reduced fraction of the left ventricular ejection (CH-fibrillation) II-IV
FC. For the patients with heart failure and preserved LVEF, the results of the TOPCAT study turned out to be neutral, but the data of retrospective analyzes
suggest that MCRA therapy can be effective in reducing the risk of death and hospitalizations for a certain contingent and this category of patients.
Key words: chronic heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, eplerenone, spironolactone
For citation: Skvortsov A. A. Antagonists of the mineralocorticoid receptor in the treatment of patients with chronic heart failure and myocardial infarction:
a modern approach to an old problem // RMJ. 2017. № 4. P. 257–264.