Clinical and economic analysis of the use of innovative drug sacubitril/valsartan in the treatment of patients suffering from chronic heart failure with
reduced ejection fraction.
Zhuravleva M.V., Kukes V.G., Prokof'ev A.B., Serebrova S.Y., Gorodetskaya G.I.

I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University
Scientific Center for Expertise of Means of Medical Application, Moscow

The issue of the treatment of patients with chronic heart failure (CHF) with reduced ejection fraction of the left ventricle (LV) is a relevant clinical problem due
to the frequency of hospitalization and mortality of the patients suffering from this pathology. Sacubitril/valsartan supramolecular complex can improve the
quality of life of the patients and improve the prognosis for the patients with CHF, including the group resistant to the comprehensive "standard" therapy with
maximum tolerated doses of β-adrenoblockers (β-AB), Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptors blockers of 2 type, Mineralo-
corticoid Receptor Antagonists (MCRA) and diuretics. The clinical study demonstrated a high efficacy of the drug sacubitril/valsartan in affecting a co-primary
efficacy endpoint (cardiovascular mortality or hospitalization for acute decompensation of CHF). The conducted international clinical and economic studies re-
veal additional benefits of using sacubitril /valsartan in the health care system. Modeling methods applied in the pharmacoeconomic analysis of the drug sacu-
bitril/valsartan compared to enalapril, showed that the cost figures for the Quality adjusted life year (QALY) in patients with CHF decreased with the long-term
use of this drug. Moreover, budget impact analysis demonstrates a reduction in direct medical costs associated with hospital care and treatment of associated
diseases, and reduced non-medical costs associated with physical assistance and involvement of social services.
Key words: chronic heart failure, reduced ejection fraction of the left ventricle, sacubitril/valsartan, quality of life, budget impact analysis, cost-effective-
ness analysis.
For citation: Zhuravleva M.V., Kukes V.G., Prokof'ev A.B. et. al. Clinical and economic analysis of the use of innovative drug sacubitril/valsartan in the treat-
ment of patients suffering from chronic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. // RMJ. 2017. № 4. P. 282–289.