The algorithm of selection of the drug for the treatment of hypertension
Zadionchenko V.S.1, Schikota A.M.1, Yalymov A.A.1, Shehyan G.G.1, Timofeeva N.Y.1, Oganezova L.G.2,3 Terpigorev S.A.3, Kabanova T.G.3, Nikishenkov A.M.3

1 Moscow State Medical Stomatological University named after A.I. Evdokimov
2 Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow
3 M.F. Vladimirskiy Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute

The article presents the algorithm of choosing the optimal antihypertensive drug for the treatment of hypertension in patients with high comorbidity (for ex-
ample, in case of hypertension combination with chronic heart failure, diabetes, nephropathy, hypertrophy of the myocardium of the left ventricle of the
heart). The article also gives a classification of arterial hypertension, describes the main groups of antihypertensive drugs with a description of their mech-
anism of action and possible side effects. Special attention is given to a non-pharmacological treatment: a psychological discharge, smoking cessation and
limited alcohol consumption, physical activity and a balanced diet. The authors described in detail the hypotensive drug from the group of blockers of AT1-
receptor of angiotensin II - candesartan (Giposart, Akrikhin company). The article presents the results of a multicenter randomized research of candesartan
in patients with hypertension, nephropathy, with diabetes mellitus and heart failure.
The aim of using the algorithm is to achieve a protective effect in respect of targeted organs. The article provides the evidence base of efficiency and safety
of candesartan. Candesartan has a good dose-dependent antihypertensive effect in all categories of patients with hypertension and can be recommended for
a wider clinical use.
Key words: blocker AT1-receptor of angiotensin II, candesartan, Geocart, hypertension, nephropathy, heart failure, myocardial infarction
For citation: Zadionchenko V.S., Schikota A.M., Yalymov A.A. et al. The algorithm of selection of the drug for the treatment of hypertension // RMJ. 2017. №