Antibacterial treatment for chronic sinusitis
Kunel'skaya N.L., Turovskiy A.B., Kolbanova I.G., Popova I.A.

L.I. Sverzhevskiy Scientific Research Institute for Ear, Nose, and Throat Diseases, Moscow

The paper discusses treatment efficacy of chronic sinusitis and uncovers major principles and priorities in antibacterial therapy choice based on authors’
study.
Aim: to improve treatment efficacy of sinusitis with nasal polyps with respect to the effect of persistent Staphylococcus infection on the development and
course of the disease.
Patients and methods: the study included 105 patients with chronic sinusitis and nasal polyps who underwent clinical examination and laboratory, im-
munological, and allergy tests. Comparative analysis of different treatment regimens (topical steroid plus antihistamine or topical steroid plus antihistamine
plus antibacterial agent every 6 months) was performed.
Results: the prevalence of persistent Staphylococcus infection among the patients with nasal polyps was 71%. The occurrence of sensitization to Staph. au-
reus antigens wass 55.2%. It was demonstrated that clinical course of nasal polyps associated with Staph. aureus carriage is more severe due to the
eosinophilic inflammation as a result of Staph. аureus colonization. Moreover, sensitization to Staph. aureus antigens enhances eosinophilic inflammation
in nasal polyps as compared with non-sensitized persons. Additional antibacterial agent significantly improves disease course and reduces eosinophilic in-
flammation severity by 1.5-times in all patients with nasal polyps and twice in carriers and persons sensitized to Staph. аureus antigens.
Conclusions: patients with nasal polyps sensitized to Staph. aureus antigens are more resistant to standard treatment with topical steroids and antihista-
mines than non-sensitized patients thus requiring bacteriological monitoring and periodic antibacterial therapy.
Key words: nasal polyps, antibacterial therapy, Staphylococcus aureus, sensitization to Staphylococcus aureus, recurrence of nasal polyps, levofloxacin,
chronic sinusitis, eosinophilic inflammation, Staphylococcus antigens, treatment of nasal polyps.
For citation: Kunel'skaya N.L., Turovskiy A.B., Kolbanova I.G., Popova I.A. Antibacterial treatment for chronic sinusitis // RMJ. 2016. № 21. P. 1411–1416.