Algorithm of surgical decision making in patients with chronic paralytic and combined laryngeal stenosis
Starostina S.V.

I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University

In traumatic laryngeal stenosis, combined reconstructive surgery with laryngeal and tracheal prosthetics is the most promising procedure which recovers
anatomical integrity and functions of larynx.
Aim: to develop an algorithm of surgical decision which increases the efficacy of the surgery and includes anthropometry (i.e., the measurement of neck
parameters and the assessment of body type), building of regression models of relevant laryngeal anthropometric parameters, the choice of optimal
method of laryngoplasty depending on clinical data (the size of the glottis and the location of vocal folds), calculation of autograft size and the length of T-
shaped tube based on the mathematical analysis of anthropometric and organometric characteristics, laryngotracheoplasty and prosthetics of surgically
created laryngotracheal space to prevent recurrent laryngeal stenosis and scarring in the late postoperative period.
Patients and methods: 71 patients aged 23-68 years with chronic paralytic (31%) and combined (69%) laryngeal stenosis were enrolled in the study. The
examination included anthropometry, endoscopy, spirometry, X-ray tomography, and computed tomography. Extralaryngeal laterofixation of the vocal
cord (n = 22), extralaryngeal laterofixation of the vocal cord and stenting with T-shaped silicone tube (n = 43), or dissection of scars after prior laryngo-
plasty and readdressing of cricoid cartilage with laryngeal stenting (n = 6) was performed.
Conclusions: planned surgical treatment using the algorithm which considers neck anthropometry and body type provided successful rehabilitation of 68
patients (95,8%) with chronic paralytic and combined laryngeal stenosis.
Key words: laryngeal paralysis, chronic stenosis, laterofixation of the vocal cord, arytenoidotomy, T-shaped tube, anthropometry.
For citation: Starostina S.V. Algorithm of surgical decision making in patients with chronic paralytic and combined laryngeal stenosis // RMJ. 2016. № 21.