The efficacy of specific antiviral therapy and immunomodulation for oropharyngeal chronic inflammatory disorders complicated by viral infections
caused by Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae
Kryukov A.I.1, Turovskiy A.B.1, Popova I.A.1, Savostikova M.V.2

1 L.I. Sverzhevskiy Research Clinical Institute of ENT Diseases, Moscow
2 N.N. Blokhin Russian Oncological Scientific Center, Moscow

The role of persistent viral infections caused by Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae in the development and recurrences of oropharyngeal chronic inflam-
matory disorders is clear.
Aim: to assess the efficacy of specific antiviral therapy and immunomodulation for oropharyngeal chronic inflammatory disorders complicated by viral in-
fections caused by Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae.
Patients and methods: the study enrolled 174 patients with oropharyngeal chronic inflammatory disorders who were subdivided into 3 groups. Group A in-
cluded patients with oropharyngeal chronic inflammatory disorders caused by Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae who received specific therapy. Group B
included patients with oropharyngeal chronic inflammatory disorders caused by Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae who received standard therapy. Group

РМЖ, 2016 № 21

1435


Смежные проблемы

Оториноларингология

C included negative for Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae patients with oropharyngeal chronic inflammatory disorders (real-time PCR) who received
standard therapy. Clinical examination, virological, and cytological studies were performed before and after the treatment to assess the efficacy of specific
antiviral therapy and immunomodulation in patients with oropharyngeal chronic inflammatory disorders caused by Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae and
patients who were negative for Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae (real-time PCR).
Results: in patients with oropharyngeal chronic inflammatory disorders caused by Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae who received specific antiviral ther-
apy and immunomodulation, the treatment was more effective than standard therapy. In patients with oropharyngeal chronic inflammatory disorders caused
by Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae who received standard therapy (group B), the disease was more severe as compared with the patients who were neg-
ative for Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae. Clinical manifestations (by pharyngoscopy) and patients’ assessments correlate with the results of virological
and cytological studies.
Key words: chronic tonsillitis, chronic pharyngitis, herpes virus infection, papillomavirus infection, Galavit®, immunomodulating therapy.
For citation: Kryukov A.I., Turovskiy A.B., Popova I.A., Savostikova M.V. The efficacy of specific antiviral therapy and immunomodulation for oropharyngeal
chronic inflammatory disorders complicated by viral infections caused by Herpesviridae and Papillomaviridae // RMJ. 2016. № 21. P. 1435–1440.