The treatment of chronic adenoiditis in preschool children
Santalova G.V., Gasilina E.S.

Samara State Medical University

Waldeyer's ring disorders rank first among pediatric ENT diseases. Nasal and pharyngeal mucosa is the most susceptible structure in chronic tonsillitis.
Chronic inflammation of nasal and pharyngeal mucosa results in hearing loss, exacerbation of chronic otitis and sinusitis, developmental retardation, and
functional disorders of various organs and systems. Detoxification and drainage should be included into the complex treatment of any chronic inflammation.
Antihomotoxic agents meet these requirements.
Aim: to assess the efficacy of chronic adenoiditis treatment with antihomotoxic drugs and to summarize the experience with some of these agents (i.e., Mu-
cosa compositum, Euphorbium compositum, Lymphomyosot) in preschool children.
Patients and methods: retrospective and prospective studies enrolled 80 children aged 4-6 years with moderate chronic adenoiditis who were subdivided in-
to two groups. Study group received complex therapy including antihomotoxic drugs while controls received standard treatment.
Results: unfavorable outcomes were significantly less common in children who received antihomotoxic drugs than in children who received standard treat-
ment. In addition, antihomotoxic drugs were effective in acute respiratory infections and reduced intoxication symptoms (by clinical outcomes).
Conclusions: complex homeopathic remedies Mucosa compositum, Lymphomyosot, and Euphorbium compositum demonstrated good tolerability and com-
patibility with the standard treatment for chronic adenoiditis. They can be considered as an alternative to the standard therapy for moderate chronic ade-
noiditis in pediatric otorhinolaryngology and might be recommended for this condition.
Key words: children, preschool years, chronic adenoiditis, detoxification, drainage, antihomotoxic drugs, Mucosa compositum, Euphorbium compositum,
Lymphomyosot.
For citation: Santalova G.V., Gasilina E.S. The treatment of chronic adenoiditis in preschool children // RMJ. 2016. № 21. P. 1441–1445.