Complex approach to the diagnosis and treatment of otorhinosinusogenic pyoinflammatory intracranial complications: state-of-the-art
Yanov Yu.K.1, Krivopalov A.A.1, Shcherbuk A.Yu.2, Rubin A.N.2, Tuzikov N.A.3

1 St. Petersburg Research Institution of Ear, Throat, Nose, and Speech
2 St. Petersburg State University
3 City Outpatient Department No. 32, St. Petersburg

The importance of the study is determined by an increased rate of otorhinosinusogenic pyoinflammatory intracranial complications in Russia as well as by
high hospital mortality from these conditions.
Aim: to identify preoperative and intraoperative lethality predictors in otorhinosinusogenic pyoinflammatory intracranial complications and to evaluate the
efficacy of a novel care management algorithm.
Patients and methods: a total of 303 patients (199 men and 104 women, 65.68% vs. 34.32%) aged 15-85 (on average, 39.3±17.4 years) were included in the
study. These patients underwent surgeries for otorhinosinusogenic pyoinflammatory intracranial complications in Russia between 2000 and 2014. The au-
thors developed care management algorithm which was applied in 81 patients (26.7%). Both preoperative (demographic, social, organizational, treatment-
and-diagnostic) and intraoperative factors were analyzed to identify lethality predictors. The efficacy of this approach was assessed as well. We analyzed
medical organizational and clinical data on care management in otorhinosinusogenic pyoinflammatory intracranial complications at every level, i.e., primary
health care, expert care, and rehabilitation.

РМЖ, 2016 № 21

1447


Смежные проблемы

Оториноларингология

Results: multiple logistic regression analysis of lethality predictors in otorhinosinusogenic pyoinflammatory intracranial complications revealed that it is pre-
operative factors that affecting treatment outcomes. Among them are errors which resulted in long pre-op period and increased risk of unfavorable outcome.
Authors’ care management algorithm significantly reduced the risk of hospital mortality.
Conclusions: care management algorithm for otorhinosinusogenic pyoinflammatory intracranial complications minimizes numerous errors in medical care
organization and treatment diagnostic process.
Key words: specialized ENT care, specialized neurosurgical care, otorhinosinusogenic intracranial complications, care management algorithm.
For citation: Yanov Yu.K., Krivopalov A.A., Shcherbuk A.Yu. et. al. Complex approach to the diagnosis and treatment of otorhinosinusogenic pyoinflammato-
ry intracranial complications: state-of-the-art // RMJ. 2016. № 21. P. 1447–1455.