Complex etiopathogenetic therapy of patients with chronic bacterial prostatitis
Kulchavena E.V.1,2, Breusov A.A.3

1 Novosibirsk Scientific Research Institute of Tuberculosis
2 Novosibirsk State Medical University
3 «BIOVER» Medical Center, Novosibirsk

The results of treatment of patients with chronic prostatitis (CP) remain unsatisfactory, the disease tends to a continuously recurrent course, which deter-
mines the urgency of finding new approaches to therapy.
Aim: to determine the efficacy and safety of the combined use of Afhalaza and levofloxacin in patients with chronic bacterial prostatitis (CBP).
Study design: simple open comparative non-randomized bidirectional study.
Patients and Methods: The study included 62 patients with CBP. The symptomatology was assessed according to a point scale. All patients received lev-
ofloxacin. 24 patients (comparison group - CG) did not receive additional treatment, and 38 patients of the main group (MG) additionally received Afhalaza
sublingually for 4 months. Patients of both groups were examined after 1 month of the treatment, after completion of antibacterial therapy, and 4 months
after receiving Aphalaza in the MG and without receiving any additional treatment – in the CG. 
Results: Every second patient with CВP had sexual dysfunction. Levofloxacin therapy made it possible to achieve reliable eradication of the pathogen and
normalization of the prostate secretion in 94.7% of patients, but sexual dysfunction in patients of comparison group remained. The use of Aphalaza for 4
months significantly improved the performance of sexual function and the end result of therapy. Against the background of Aphalaza administration, restora-
tion of libido was noted, as well as the improvement of erectile function according to the cumulative assessment of the answers to the II, III and IV questions
of the male copulatory function scale. There were no significant adverse reactions to the treatment or complications of the therapy. 
The conclusion: Levofloxacin is highly effective in patients with chronic bacterial prostatitis. It is advisable to include Aphalaza in the complex treatment of
patients with chronic bacterial prostatitis.
Key words: prostatitis, prostatic tuberculosis, sexual dysfunction, Aphalaza, release-active antibodies, erectile dysfunction, levofloxacin.
For citation: Kulchavena E.V., Breusov A.A. Complex etiopathogenetic therapy of patients with chronic bacterial prostatitis // RMJ. 2017. № 27. P. 1997–2002.