Interstitial radiotherapy therapy (brachytherapy) of prostate cancer. Own experience of the National Medical Research Radiological Center of the Min-
istry of Health of Russia
A.D. Kaprin1, V.A. Biryukov2, A.V. Chernichenko3, A.V. Koryakin4, V.A. Polyakov3, O.B. Karyakin2, V.N. Galkin2, O.I. Apolikhin4, S.A. Ivanov2, A.V. Sivkov4,
V.N. Oschepkov5, B.Ya. Alekseev1, A.A. Obukhov2, O.G. Lepilina2
1 National Medical Research Radiological Center, Moscow
2 Medical Radiological Research Center named after A.F. Tsyb, branch of National Medical Research Radiological Center, Obninsk
3 Moscow Scientific Oncological Institute named after P.A. Herzen, branch of National Medical Research Radiological Center
4 Research Institute of Urology and Interventional Radiology named after N.A. Lopatkin, branch of National Medical Research Radiological Center, Moscow
5 Multifield Clinical Medical Center "Medical City", Tyumen
Currently, the main methods of treatment of localized prostate cancer (PC) are surgery and radiation therapy. Brachytherapy is an interstitial radiation therapy, which
allows to bring a highly effective dose of radiation to the affected organ using a minimally invasive intervention. There are low and high dose rate brachytherapy, de-
pending on the source of radiation. This article reflects the main stages of the historical development of PC brachytherapy both abroad and in our country. The descrip-
tion of the main methods of brachytherapy used in modern medical practice is given. Reference is made to the methodological recommendations of the world's leading
communities on the contact radiation therapy with the use of  low dose rate radiation sources. The main indications and contraindications to PC brachytherapy are de-
scribed. Summary data on the effectiveness of the method are presented depending on different groups of the PC course prognosis. For the first time, the combined
results of low dose rate brachytherapy received from the branches of the National Medical Research Radiological Center were published. The article provides the data
of clinical trials of Russian I-125 sources initiated by National Medical Research Radiological Center within the program of import substitution.  
Key words: prostate cancer, interstitial radiation therapy, brachytherapy, indications, contraindications, prognosis groups, combined results, Russian microsources I-125.
For citation: Kaprin A.D., Biryukov V.A., Chernichenko A.V. et al. Interstitial radiotherapy therapy (brachytherapy) of prostate cancer. Own experience of the
National Medical Research Radiological Center of the Ministry of Health of Russia // RMJ. 2017. № 27. P. 2011–2014.