Surgical treatment of patients with localized and locally advanced prostate cancer: the results of a single center study
B.Ya. Alekseev, K.M. Nyushko, A.A. Krasheninnikov, N.V. Vorobiev, E.Yu. Safronova, A.S. Kalpinskiy, S.A. Sergienko, I.A. Taraki, M.Z. Temirgereev,
A.D. Kaprin
National Medical Research Radiological Center, Moscow

At present prostate cancer (PC) is an extremely urgent oncological problem in Russia because of a steady increase in the incidence and mortality of men due
to this pathology. The introduction of new methods of laboratory and radiation diagnostics allows not only to diagnose PC, but also to more accurately
assess the clinical stage of the disease. A multidisciplinary individual approach to each patient provides more treatment opportunities. Many new methods
of PC treatment are being developed and studied. Radical prostatectomy (RPE) and radiotherapy (remote radiation therapy, brachytherapy) are currently
the "gold standard" for radical treatment of patients with PC, nevertheless surgical treatment remains the main method of therapy for patients with localized
and locally advanced prostate cancer, demonstrating satisfactory oncological and functional results.
Aim: to evaluate immediate and long-term results of surgical treatment of patients with PC.
Patients and methods: professionals of the oncourology department of the Moscow Scientific Oncological Institute named after P.A. Herzen made a retro-
spective analysis of 1 846 patients with prostate cancer who underwent RPE from 1998 to 2016. A detailed analysis of preoperative characteristics of
patients, data of pathomorphological study, intra- and postoperative complications, as well as distant functional and oncological results of surgical treatment
is given. It has been revealed, that there is a tendency to an increase in the number of PC patients with a high risk of disease progression and the presence of
unfavorable prognosis factors, requiring surgical treatment.
Conclusion: the accumulation of surgical experience allows to significantly optimize the results of treating the patients with PC, and to reduce the frequency
of complications. The advantage of surgical treatment is the possibility of precise staging and detection of unfavorable pathomorphological factors, which
allows to develop rational treatment tactics. In patients with adverse postoperative prognostic factors (lymphogenic metastases, including extracapsular in-
vasion), an adjuvant therapy is recommended to improve survival rates.
Key words: prostate cancer, radical prostatectomy, remote radiation therapy, brachytherapy.
For citation: Alekseev B.Ya., Nyushko K.M., Krasheninnikov A.A. et al. Surgical treatment of patients with localized and locally advanced prostate cancer: the
results of a single center study // RMJ. 2017. № 27. P. 2019–2025.