Morphological results of electrochemical lysis in patients with prostate cancer.
Velsher L.Z.1 , Pushkar D.Yu.1, Stakhanov M.L.1,2, Gorchak Yu.Yu.1, Anikanova E.V.1, Andreeva O.V.3, Firsov K.A.1, Ishevskiy G.B.1,2
1 Moscow State Medical Stomatological University named after A.I.Evdokimov
2 Cancer Center at the Central clinical hospital No. 2 named after N.A. Semashko of Russian Railways, Moscow
3 Smolensk Regional Institute of Pathology

The aim of the study was to evaluate the pathomorphological changes in the prostate tissues and the tumor tissue contained in it, resulting from electro-
chemical lysis.
Patients and methods. A pilot study was carried out to compare the pathomorphological changes in preparations of the removed prostate glands of patients
with prostate cancer. Patients of the main group (n = 18) received non-invasive electrochemical lysis sessions, followed by radical prostatectomy. Patients
of the control group (n = 18) underwent radical prostatectomy. Sessions of electrochemical lysis for the patients of the main group were performed using a
device BET-7 with cutaneous  plate electrodes. Patients received 3-5 sessions of electrochemical lysis, lasting for less than 180 minutes. The current strength
was not more than 40 mA, the voltage was 5–20 V. 
Results. The macroscopic examination of the removed prostate glands revealed focal hemorrhages in 27.8% of the patients and softening regions in 61.1% of
patients in the main group. In the control group 11.1% of the patients had focal hemorrhages at  macroscopic  examination (р<0,05). 38.9% of patients of the
first group had areas of total destruction of the tumor, 72,2% of the patients had degenerative  changes in the stroma of the tumor, 61.1% of patients had de-
generative changes in the parenchyma of the tumor, 50% of the patients had focal proliferation of connective tissue. 33.4% of patients had similar changes
in regional lymph nodes. Morphological changes were focal and were not detected in prostate tissue outside the tumor growth. The morphological changes
described were not found in patients of the control group, with the exception of connective tissue proliferation in the tumor in 11.3% of patients (p <0.05).
Conclusions. Method of electrochemical lysis causes selective damage to prostate cancer.
Key words: prostate cancer, electrochemical lysis, morphological study, destruction of tumor tissue, dystrophy, sclerosis.
For citation: Velsher L.Z., Pushkar D.Yu., Stakhanov M.L. et al. Morphological results of electrochemical lysis in patients with prostate cancer. // RMJ. 2017.