Possibilities of introducing the international protocol for the management of children with hand, foot and mouth disease on 
the ambulatory stage of pediatric care
S.A. Tsarkova1, G.A. Moroz2, N.I. Birulya2
1 Ural State Medical University, Ekaterinburg
2 Children`s City Clinical Hospital № 11, Ekaterinburg

The article considers the possibility of introducing an international protocol for the management of children with hand, foot and 
mouth disease on the ambulatory stage of providing pediatric care in the Russian Federation. The wide prevalence of this disease 
and the high resistance of the pathogen in the environment gives reasons to admit its epidemiological danger, especially for 
organized children’s groups, and the need to review and finalize the legislative measures taken to prevent and treat hand, foot 
and mouthh disease. The WHO (World Health Organization) protocol for the treatment and prevention of hand, foot and mouth 
disease in children contains a list of indications for ambulatory treatment, hospitalization, recommendations for symptomatic 
therapy. At the example of a clinical case, the orders and standards of Russian regulatory legal documents were assessed for 
compliance with the WHO protocol for the treatment and prevention of hand, foot and mouth disease in children. The possibility 
of using the international protocol in the conditions of the district pediatric service in the territory of the Russian Federation is 
shown. In this regard, there is a need for additional improvement of pediatricians’ qualification and ability to diagnose the “hand, 
foot and mouth” syndrome and bringing their knowledge in line with international standards to avoid an unreasonable treatment.
Key words: enteroviruses, vesicular exanthema, WHO protocol, “hand, foot and mouth”, aciclovir, outpatient clinic.
For citation: Tsarkova S.A., Moroz G.A., Birulya N.I. Possibilities of introducing the international protocol for the management 
of children with hand, foot and mouth disease on the ambulatory stage of pediatric care// RMJ. 2018. № 9. P. 17–19.