Feasibility of neonatal screening in primary immunodeficiency diseases
I.A. Korsunskiy1–3, M.A. Gordukova1, A.S. Smirnova1, D.B. Munblit2, N.V. Davydova1, I.G. Kozlov3, A.P. Prodeus1,3,  
A.A. Korsunskiy1,2, A.G. Rumyantsev3

1 Children’s City Hospital № 9, Moscow
2 Sechenov University, Moscow
3 Dmitry Rogachev National Research Center of Paediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow

Primary  immunodeficiency  states  are  a  heterogeneous  group  of  congenital  defects  in  the  cells  of  the  immune  system, 
which are most often clinically manifested in recurrent infectious and autoimmune diseases of various severity, as well as 
malignant neoplasms. Severe forms of primary immunodeficiency lead to death in the first two years of life. Moderate forms 
lead to irreversible changes in the body, which significantly reduce the quality of a human life. The average age of setting 
an immunological diagnosis in developed countries is about 4–5 months. Most often, PIDs can be characterized by reduced 
functional ability of leukocytes to fight infections, however, some disorders are associated with limited differentiation of 
lymphoid cells or their increased apoptosis. Neonatal screening of primary immunodeficiencies helps to identify moderate 
to severe immune system defects prior to clinical manifestation. The outcomes of screening programs launched in different 
countries in recent years show high sensitivity and specificity of analysis aimed at detecting reduced TREC and KREC levels. 
Early detection of immunocompromised infants allows for modern approaches to treatment, improving survival rates. Early 
screening  and  intervention  programmes  in  children  with  primary  immunodeficiencies  has  also  demonstrated  high  cost 
effectiveness.
Key words: primary immunodeficiencies, PIDs, neonatal screening, TREC, KREC. 
For citation: Korsunskiy I.A., Gordukova M.A., Smirnova A.S. et al. Feasibility of neonatal screening in primary immunodeficiency 
diseases // RMJ. 2018. № 9. P. 29–32.