Stress in children: how to activate adaptive reserves in children
E.S. Akarachkova1, D.V. Blinov2, O.V. Kotova1, L.R. Kadyrova3, D.I. Lebedeva4, I.M. Melnikova5, A.S. Sorokina6, 
E.V. Travnikova7, E.V. Tsareva8

1 International Society of Stress “Stress Under Control»
2 “Lapino” Clinic, Odintsovo
3 Kazan State Medical Academy — a branch of Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Professional Education
4 “Regional Treatment and Rehabilitation Center”, Tyumen
5 Yaroslavl State Medical University
6 Sechenov University, Moscow
7 Russian Presidential Academy of National Economy and Public Administration, Moscow
8 “Unison” Medical Center, Moscow

The  child’s  physical  health  is  inseparable  from  his  emotional  state.  Stresses  actively  interfere  in  the  life  of  children  and 
adolescents, reduce their ability to self-control, interfere with normal psychological and social development, and can also 
lead to negative  consequences already at an older age. The adaptation mechanisms to stress of children and adolescents 
are imperfect. In the clinical practice, the application of therapeutic and prophylactic methods with the aim of increasing the 
stress-resistance in childhood and adolescence remains relevant. The article presents drug and non-drug methods, including 
the regimen of work and rest, motor conditions and adequate nutrition in conditions of stress. Methods for group activities 
(self-control techniques, relaxation, visualization, art therapy, exercises for removing «internal» blocks, communication skills, 
as well as working with metaphor and exercises for relieving anxiety) are recommended. Based on the literature, the conclusion 
is drawn that the healthy lifestyle of a child (full and proper nutrition, regular physical activity combined with rest, training 

45

РМЖ, 2018 № 9ПедиатрияНеврология/Психиатрия
in skills of overcoming difficulties) allows not only to increase the adaptive capacity, but also to substantially minimize the 
effects of chronic stress.
Key  words:  children,  adolescents,  adaptation,  stress,  prevention,  treatment,  bioorganic  magnesium,  magnesium  pidolate, 
magnesium citrate, Magne B6, sleep, sleep disorders, physical activity, nutrition, psychological adaptation.
For citation: Akarachkova E.S., Blinov D.V., Kotova O.V. et al. Stress in children: how to activate adaptive reserves in children //  
RMJ. 2018. № 9. P. 45–51.