Experience in use of release-active drugs in mental disorders treatment in young children
G.V. Kozlovskaya, M.A. Kalinina, M.V. Ivanov, L.F. Kremneva, T.A. Krylatova

Mental Health Research Center, Moscow

A search for new forms and approaches in medicopsychological correction of revealed mental abnormalities during an early 
childhood period is very actual.
Aim:  an  effectiveness  evaluation  of  Tenoten  for  children  application  in  child  psychiatric  practice  on  the  example  of  young 
patients.
Patients and Methods: a cohort of 80 children (60 boys and 20 girls) aged 1–4 years was selected. The cohort included 
children  with  asthenia,  anxiety-phobic,  subdepressive,  psychovegetative  disorders  in  forms  of  sleep  disorders,  eating 
behavior disorders, gastrointestinal disorders, and other neurotic (neurosis-like) and psychotic disorders. A procedure of 
Tenoten for children prescription: the study continued throughout one year, with regularity of inspection once a month. 
Tenoten for children was used in a form of 1–2 absorbable tablets (or in a form of crumbled tablet with an addition of a 
half teaspoonful of water) on an empty stomach under the tongue in the morning for 2–3 months, followed by a break of 
6 months and a repeated course of taking that of the same duration, and in a number of cases was combined with complex 
homeopathic drugs.
Results: the greatest effect in using of Tenoten for children was noted for the asthenic syndrome, anxiety-phobic syndrome, and 
psychovegetative disorders, with an exception of dissomnia, as well as in states of a mental deviation risk. A negative result was 
obtained in the Tenoten for children therapy of catatonic disorders, speech disorders, severe autistic disorders. There were no 
cases accompanied by complications in the Tenoten for children treatment. In single cases (patients with schizotypal disorders), 

57

РМЖ, 2018 № 9ПедиатрияНеврология/Психиатрия
side effects of the drug were noted in a form of disease symptom intensification, which was associated with an activating action 
of the drug.
Conclusion: Tenoten for children can be recommended for wide use in the child psychiatric practice.
Key words: children, early age, medicopsychological correction, allopathic drugs, release-active drugs, Tenoten for children.
For citation: Kozlovskaya G.V., Kalinina M.A., Ivanov M.V. et al. Experience in use of release-active drugs in mental disorders 
treatment in young children // RMJ. 2018. № 9. P. 57–61.