Rational pharmacotherapy of acute respiratory infections as a prevention of polypharmacy in children
Lukushkina E.F., Baskakova E.Yu.

Nizhny Novgorod State Medical Academy

Drug therapy plays an important role in complex treatment of childhood diseases of infectious and noninfectious nature. It is important to follow guidelines
of evidence-based medicine. Often results of scientific trials on diseases' pathogenesis justify, according to authors opinion, the use of all new drugs. This re-
sults increase the drug load on the patient in many times.
Increasing drug load leads to increased risk of drug interactions and adverse side effects. The number of drug interaction cases increases significantly when
assigning 6 or more drugs.
Thus, the concept of polypharmacy, which implies the co-administration (often unjustified) of many drugs, rapidly came into medical glossary.
Acute viral infections (AVRI) treatment includes mainly symptomatic and pathogenetic drugs. The number of antiviral chemotherapeutic medicines, approved
for use in pediatric practice, is quite narrow. Interferons and their inducers, adaptogens of different origin can activate children's non-specific resistance.
Antiviral drug Isoprinosine (inosine pranobex) is permitted for use in children aged 3 years and older. Clinical trial showed good tolerability and safety
profile. Isoprinosine was synthesized in the 70-ies of the last century in the United States. At first, it was positioned as a drug with antiviral properties only.
And only in terms of clinical trials, it was found that Isoprinosine had powerful immunomodulatory effects and was a multipurpose drug of choice, solving
basic problems AVRI: prompt and careful treatment without unnecessary drug load, viral replication suppression, normalization of immune reactions, sup-
pressed by viral infection, reducing the severity and duration of disease and complications prevention.
Key words: drug therapy, polypharmacy, children, ARVI, antiviral drug with immunomodulating activity, Isoprinosine, treatment, prevention.
For citation: Lukushkina E.F., Baskakova E.Yu. Rational pharmacotherapy of acute respiratory infections as a prevention of polypharmacy in children // RMJ.