Modern view on the basic skin care for children with atopic dermatitis
Shchegelskaya T.Yu., Tseytlin O.Ya.

R&D Department of OAO Avanta, Krasnodar

The paper's objective is to evaluate the role and significance of the basic skin care in children with atopic dermatitis (AD). In addition, main features of spe-
cialized cosmetics usage are observed with respect to individual skin status and environmental conditions.
Structural and functional components of stratum corneum play the key role in providing the normal epidermal barrier, especially their formation/degradation
consequence and rapidity. Majority of these processes are pH-dependent thus both skin surface and epidermal pH levels are of great importance for the bar-
rier function. The process of "protective barrier" formation takes several months (up to years) after birth. Infants' skin differs from the adults' one.
Epidermal barrier dysfunction is the driving cause of AD and manifests in skin dryness, changes in lipid matrix, proteases activity alterations. Due to xerosys
skin becomes prone to allergens, irritants and pathogenic microorganisms. Giving the start to the “itch-scratch” cycle, it provokes AD exacerbation and sig-
nificantly decreases the quality of patients’ life. 
Basic skin care with moisturizing and soothing cosmetics (emollients) takes an important place in all major Guidelines for AD management. Main objectives
of specialized care are skin hydration and lipid matrix restoration. Simple and clear skin care algorithm including proper skin cleansing, moisturizing, itch
prevention lead to significant improvement of skin status and patients' well-being. Doctors recommendations should be based on patient's skin status, seasonal
and environment factors. Educational programs for parents, appropriate skin care can prolong AD remission and significantly improve the quality of infant’s
life.
Key words: Atopic dermatitis, epidermal barrier dysfunction, atopic skin care, emollients.
For citation: Shchegelskaya T.Yu., Tseytlin O.Ya. Modern view on the basic skin care for children with atopic dermatitis // RMJ. 2016. № 18. P. 1210–1216.