Immune system condition in patients with lower limb varicose vein disease
I.M. Vasiliev1,2, M.P. Rykova2, L.I. Bogdanets3, S.A. Ponomarev2, E.N. Antropova2, S.A. Kalinin2, S.K. Tagirova1,2,  
V.V. Seleznev1, I.P. Marchenko1

1 Bauman City Clinical Hospital No.29, Moscow
2 Institute of Medical and Biological Problems of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow
3 Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow

Aim: to study the state of innate and adaptive immunity in patients with lower limb varicose vein disease (LLVVD) of C4 and C6 
clinical class according to CEAP classification.
Patients and Methods: the study involved 34 patients with LLVVD who were on outpatient treatment in phlebological center 
of the Pirogov City Clinical Hospital No.1. The control group consisted of 17 healthy volunteers. In the peripheral blood were 
assessed by the absolute and relative count of:
1) monocytes and granulocytes, expressing receptors TLR2, TLR4, TLR6, CD11b, CD16, CD18, CD24, CD36, CD54, CD206;
2) lymphocytes, expressing receptors on its surface CD16, CD56, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD19, CD25, СD45RA, CD45RO.
Results: an analysis of the receptor repertoire of cellular factors of natural resistance in patients with LLVVD of C4–C6 classes 
of changes in the system of pattern recognition receptors associated with a significant increase (p<0.05) of granulocytes and/or 
monocytes in the peripheral blood, expressing signal Toll-like receptors — TLR2, TLR4 and TLR6, on their surface, compared 
with healthy volunteers.
The study of the relative and absolute count in the peripheral blood of cellular factors of the natural cytotoxicity system — 
mature circulating NK-cells — in patients with LLVVD showed that these indicators did not significantly differ from those in 
healthy persons.

54

РМЖ, 2018 № 6 (II)Ангиология/ГемостазОригинальные статьи
Analysis of the T-lymphocyte subpopulations level in the peripheral blood allowed noting some features of the T-cells phenotype 
of adaptive immunity depending on the severity of CVI.
Conclusion: this study of systemic immunity in patients with lower limb varicose vein disease of various clinical classes has 
shown that patients with LLVVD of C4 clinical class, as well as patients with LLVVD of C6 clinical class, have changes in the 
subpopulation count of immune competent cells and their functional activity.
Key words: lower limb varicose vein disease, venous trophic ulcer, innate immunity, adaptive immunity.
For citation: Vasiliev I.M., Rykova M.P., Bogdanets L.I. et al. Immune system condition in patients with lower limb varicose vein 
disease // RMJ. 2018. № 6(II). P. 54–60.