Possibilities of rivaroxaban application in combination therapy in patients with critical limb ischemia
I.I. Katelnitskii1, A.A. Zorkin2, E.V. Drozhin2, K.V. Mazaishvili2, D.S. Ivchenkov3

1 Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don
2 Surgut State University
3 Surgut City Clinical Hospital

The  article  is  devoted  to  the  possibilities  of  using  rivaroxaban  peroral  anticoagulant  as  a  component  of  the  combined 
disaggregating and anticoagulant therapy of the perioperative period in the treatment of critical limb ischemia (CLI).
An analysis of a few literature data on this issue is presented; the intermediate results of ongoing multicenter clinical studies are 
reviewed. Own experience of using rivaroxaban in 25 patients with obliterative arterial disease of the lower limbs (OADLL) and 
CLI in comparison with the traditional prescription of warfarin is generalized. The immediate results of limb revascularization 
and the nature of hemorrhagic complications were compared.
In patients with CLI using rivaroxaban in the combination therapy of the perioperative period, compared with the warfarin 
administration, there was a tendency to a decrease in the frequency of revascularization zone thrombosis. Thus, the application 
of rivaroxaban is an alternative to the traditional use of warfarin. The total frequency of hemorrhagic complications during 
rivaroxaban application was significantly lower when using warfarin (16% vs. 24%, respectively). The need for the use of blood 
products didn’t increase. An increase in the ratio of endovascular revascularizing interventions can reduce the incidence of local 
hemorrhagic complications in patients with OADLL and CLI who receive combined anti-platelet and anticoagulant therapy. The 
clinical and economic aspects of rivaroxaban in patients with OADLL and CLI require focused researches.
Key words: critical limb ischemia, obliterative arterial disease of the lower limbs, critical ischemia treatment, anticoagulant 
therapy, warfarin, NOAC, rivaroxaban.
For citation: Katelnitskii I.I., Zorkin A.A., Drozhin E.V. et al. Possibilities of rivaroxaban application in combination therapy in 
patients with critical limb ischemia // RMJ. 2018. № 6(II). P. 85–88.