On the question of clinical recommendations on osteoarthritis: Why do different countries apply different strategies?

Naumov A.V., Khovasova N.O.

Moscow State Medical and Stomatological University named after А.I. Evdokimov

The article considers in detail the strategy of managing patients with osteoarticular diseases in general medical practice. The modern information of foreign
and domestic researchers on the treatment of osteoarthritis (OA) is given. The authors' own studies show that 84% of the outpatients have joint and back
pain, and 59.2% have x-ray symptoms of OA (knee and / or hip joint). At the same time, cardiovascular disease in combination or without type 2 diabetes was
the comorbidity core in these patients. Particular attention is paid to the conservative treatment of OA. Currently, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) are widely used. However, the use of certain NSAIDs in more than a third of cases does not have the proper effect and has a number of limitations
in patients with cardiovascular diseases; on the other hand, the impossibility of a wide use of central analgesics in domestic clinical practice for chronic pain
resulting from OA often raises the questions of the choice of other drug groups. In this situation, the effectiveness of symptomatic slow-acting drugs has been
proven: chondroitin, glucosamine, diacerein, unsaponifiable compounds of avocado and soy. In domestic practice, pharmacopoeial substances of chondroitin
sulfate (Chondroguard®) and glucosamine sulfate (Sustagard® Arthro) are used both in tableted and injectable forms, which have a number of advantages
for initial use in exacerbations of chronic joint and back pain in generalized osteoarthritis.
Key words: osteoarthritis, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, chondroitin sulfate, glucosamine sulfate, Chondroguard®, Sustagard® Arthro.
For citation: Naumov A.V., Khovasova N.O. On the question of clinical recommendations on osteoarthritis: Why do different countries apply different strate-
gies? // RMJ. 2017. № 24. P. 1805–1811.