Possibilities and limitations of stereotactic irradiation in the treatment of large arteriovenous malformations of the brain
Maryashev S.A., GolanovA.V.,Yakovlev S.B., Antipina N.A., Filchenkova N.V.

National Medical Research Center of Neurosurgery named after Academic N.N. Burdenko, Moscow

Arteriovenous malformations (AVM) are congenital anomalies of cerebral vessels, in which insufficiently formed blood vessels shunt the blood directly from
the arterial blood circulation system into the venous system, bypassing the capillary network.
Currently, there are several ways to treat AVM, depending on the size, structure, location, clinical manifestations, as well as the condition and desire of the
patient. In the world, extensive experience in the surgical and endovascular treatment of AVM has been accumulated. Despite the progress of microsurgical
techniques and the improvement of methods for endovascular treatment, there is a large number of patients, to whom surgical methods are not applicable,
or whose treatment is incomplete (AVM continues to function). In recent decades, stereotaxic irradiation (radiosurgery and stereotaxic radiation therapy)
takes an increasingly important place in the treatment of patients with AVM.
Aim: to improve the results of treatment of large AVM by creating an algorithm and standardizing the hypofractionation.
Patients and methods: in National Medical Research Center of Neurosurgery named after Academic N.N. Burdenko for the years 2005-2013 108 patients
with large AVM were treated by stereotactic irradiation. In 89 cases three methods of hypofractionation were used on linear electron accelerators "Novalis"
and «Cyber knife».
Results: obliteration of AVM after stereotaxic radiation therapy in the mode of hypofractionation was found on average in 42% of patients. The optimal frac-
tionation regimen is the total focal dose up to 24 Gy, fed for 2 fractions, while AVM obliteration was achieved in 46% of patients. Statistically significant fac-
tors predicting the onset of AVM obliteration during hypofractionation in a single-factor analysis are the AVM volume ≤14 cm3 and the absence of previous
embolization.
Conclusion: stereotactic irradiation in the mode of hypofractionation is an acceptable treatment option for large AVMs (with a volume of 10 cm3 or more).
Key words: arteriovenous malformation, radiosurgery, stereotaxic irradiation, hypofractionation, obliteration, AVM.
For citation: Maryashev S.A., Golanov A.V., Yakovlev S.B. et al. Possibilities and limitations of stereotactic irradiation in the treatment of large arteriovenous
malformations of the brain // RMJ. 2017. № 16. P. 1155–1163.