Hypofractionated irradiation of the  recurrence of juvenile skull base angiofibroma: our experience and literature review
Nersesyan M.V., Galkin M.V., Ryzhova M.V., Golanov A.V., Capitanov D.N., Cherekaev V.A., Antipin N.A.

National Medical Research Center of Neurosurgery named after Academic N.N. Burdenko, Moscow

Juvenile angiofibroma of the skull base (JASB) is a benign tumor that usually develops in adolescent boys and is characterized by aggressive growth and
abundant blood supply. Clinical manifestations of JASB are: difficulty in nasal breathing; frequent, sometimes profuse nasal bleeding; hearing impairment;
deformation of the facial skeleton; exophthalmos, visual and oculomotor disorders. The common primary treatment for JASB is surgical removal, which is
usually accompanied by marked bleeding. With the development of relapse and the presence of an inoperable part of the tumor (in the region of the orbit, the
cavernous sinus), it is justified to conduct radiation treatment. Most often, radiation treatment of JASB is carried out in the form of a long course - in the
standard fractionation mode. Modern devices allow for conformational stereotactic irradiation of JASB in alternative (shorter) regimes - radiosurgery and
hypofractionation. This not only reduces the time of treatment, but also reduces the radiation load on the surrounding tissues.
Two cases of irradiation of JASB recurrences in the mode of hypofractionation with pronounced effect were considered in the work. There is also a literature
review on the radiation treatment of JASB using different fractionation regimes. Control of tumor growth, tumor response to treatment, early and late com-
plications are considered.
Key words: juvenile angiofibroma, base of skull, recurrence, radiotherapy, radiosurgery, hypofractionation, treatment of juvenile angiofibroma
For citation: Nersesyan M.V., Galkin M.V., Ryzhova M.V. et al. Hypofractionated irradiation of the  recurrence of juvenile skull base angiofibroma: our expe-
rience and literature review // RMJ. 2017. № 16. P. 1186–1189.