Experience in applying stereotaxic reirradiation in the mode of hypofractionation in cases of head and neck cancer recurrence
Mikhailov A.V.1, Vorobiev N.A.1-3, Sokurenko V.P.4, Smirnova E.V.1, Martynova N.I.1, Gutsalo Yu.V.1

11 Medical and Diagnostic Center of International Institute of Biological Systems named after Berezin Sergei, St. Petersburg
2 North-Western State Medical University named after I.I.Mechnikov, St. Petersburg
3 St. Petersburg State University
4 Russian Research Center of Radiology and Surgical Technologies named after Acad. A.M. Granova, St. Petersburg

Recurrences of head and neck cancer develop in more than half of patients after aggressive primary treatment. Surgical treatment in these cases provides
the best results, but it is not always feasible. In this regard, reirradiation remains an actual problem of modern oncology.
Aim to study the tolerability and immediate efficacy according to the criterion of local control of stereotaxic reirradiation in the mode of hypofractionation
in patients with local and regional relapses of head and neck cancer.
Patients and methods: 8 patients with local and regional head and neck cancer recurrences were included in the study, who received a course of radiotherapy
as part of the initial treatment. Patients underwent a repeated course of radiation therapy in the mode of hypofractionation (35 Gy for 7 fractions). Volumes
of irradiation were formed using PET-CT with 18F-FDG, MRI and CT. The dose was administered using the techniques of volumetric modulated arc therapy
(VMAT) using IGRT (orthogonal X-ray and CT in a conical beam) to monitor the positioning of the patient.
Results: early radiation reactions were expressed in the form of radial mucositis I-II degree, radiation dermatitis I-II degree. One patient died due to devel-
opment of profuse bleeding after 3 weeks after the end of radiation treatment. An objective response was achieved in 6 of 8 patients. With a median follow-
up of 11 months, there was no development of late radiation complications leading to a decrease in the quality of life.

1190

РМЖ, 2017 № 16


Онкология

Клинический опыт

Conclusion: stereotaxic reirradiation in the mode of hypofractionation in patients with locoregional recurrence of head and neck cancer is a well tolerated
type of treatment that provides high local control results while maintaining a satisfactory quality of life. Nevertheless, the risk of developing fatal post-radi-
ation complications determines the need for careful selection of candidates for this type of treatment.
Key words: reirradiation, head and neck cancer, relapse, hypofraction.
For citation: Mikhailov A.V., Vorobiev N.A., Sokurenko V.P. et al. Experience in applying stereotaxic reirradiation in the mode of hypofractionation in cases of
head and neck cancer recurrence // RMJ. 2017. № 16. P. 1190–1194.