Aim. To assess the efficacy and safety of the commercially available herbal preparation (Iberogast®, STW-5*) containing extracts from bitter candy tuft,
chamomile flower, peppermint leaves, caraway fruit, licorice root, lemon balm leaves, angelica root, celandine herbs, milk thistle fruit and its research prepa-
ration STW-5-S (without bitter candy tuft) in patients with functional dyspepsia.
Patients and methods. After a standardized diagnostic work-up and at least 7 days free of medication, 60 patients, diagnosed with functional dyspepsia,
were recruited in a multicenter trial and randomly assigned to one of 3 treatment groups (STW-5, STW-5-S or placebo). Each patient received the treatment
for 4 weeks. The main outcome variables were the improvement of a gastrointestinal symptom score (GIS), a sum score consisted of 10 dyspeptic symptoms
rated on a Likert scale. Dyspeptic symptoms were assessed at baseline, 2 and 4 weeks after treatment.
Results. 60 patients completed the trial (mean age 46.8 years, range 25-70, female 38 patients). Compared with placebo-group both herbal preparations
STW-5 and STW-5-S showed a clinically significant improvement of GIS after 2 and 4 weeks of treatment (p < 0.001). No statistically significant difference
could be observed between the efficacy of STW-5 and STW-5 S (p > 0.05), but a solid improvement of gastrointestinal symptoms could be achieved earlier
with STW-5 than with its research preparation STW-5-S without bitter candy tuft (p = 0,023).
Conclusions. In patients with functional dyspepsia, the commercially available herbal preparation STW-5 and its modified dispense STW-5-S tested improved
dyspeptic symptoms significantly better than placebo. The extract bitter candy tuft appeared to have an additive effect on dyspeptic symptoms.

666

РМЖ, 2016 № 11


Гастроэнтерология

Заболевания верхних отделов ЖКТ

Key words: herbal preparation, functional dyspepsia.
For citation: Madisch A., Melderis H., Mayr G. et al. A plant extract and its modified preparation in functional dyspepsia. Results of a double-blind placebo
controlled comparative study // RMJ. Gastroenterology. 2016. № 11. P. 666–672.