Clinical efficacy of transdermal glucosamine complex and its effect on the quality of life in gonarthrosis (results of open-label multicenter observational
study)
Men'shikova I.V., Klimova O.V.
I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University

Background. This paper reviews the results of non-interventional observational study on the topical use of 8% Chondroxide® Maximum cream for knee os-
teoarthrosis in outpatient rheumatology. High prevalence of osteoarthrosis (in particular, in elderly persons) and the lack of effective and safe drugs deter-
mine the importance of this study.
Aim. To assess the efficacy and safety of 8% Chondroxide® Maximum cream used for 28 days in patients with knee osteoarthrosis.
Patients and methods. 841 patients (mean age 56.0 ± 7.8 years) with knee osteoarthrosis received transdermal glucosamine complex (8% Chondroxide®
Maximum) for 28 days. Efficacy and safety of the treatment were evaluated by the improvements of knee pain (VAS), WOMAC index, functional status (HAQ
questionnaire), and the quality of life (EQ-5D questionnaire).
Results. 51.5% pain reduction on VAS and 83.6% pain reduction by WOMAC were associated with functional improvement in 75.5% of patients and decreased
stiffness in 60% of patients. Functional status (HAQ) has improved as well. Better quality of life was associated with the improvements of mobility, self-care,
and everyday activities (EQ-5D). 96.5% of doctors and patients reported on the efficacy of the drug. Approximately a quarter of patients receiving 8% Chon-
droxide® Maximum topical cream reduced their NSAIDs dose or withdrawn them. Local reactions (observed in 2 patients only) were mild.
Conclusions. 8% Chondroxide® Maximum topical cream has a good efficacy and safety profile and can be used in ambulatory patients with comorbidities.
Key words: osteoarthrosis, knee, glucosamine, Chondroxide.
For citation: Men'shikova I.V., Klimova O.V. Clinical efficacy of transdermal glucosamine complex and its effect on the quality of life in gonarthrosis (results
of open-label multicenter observational study) // RMJ. 2016. № 22. P. 1463–1470.