Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome (“Ondine’s curse”*) in a child of twins (clinical case)
Tolstova E.M.1, Zaitseva N.S.1, Zaytseva O.V.1, Mezentseva D.A.1, Efimova E.V.2, Isayeva E.K.2, Stroganov I.A.2,  
Abaseeva T.Yu.3, Radimova E.R.2, Ionova E.A.2

1 A.I. Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry
2 St. Vladimir Children’s Moscow Clinical Hospital
3 M. Vladimirsky Moscow Regional Research Clinical Institute (MONIKI), Moscow

The article presents a clinical observation of a baby from a twin with a confirmed syndrome of congenital central hypoventilation 
(CCHS).  CCHS  is  a  rare  genetic  disease  manifested  by  primary  alveolar  hypoventilation  during  sleep.  Usually  the  disease 
manifests in term infants with signs of hypoventilation and hypoxemia. Despite the hypoxemia and hypercapnia, there are no 
signs of respiratory distress and compensatory reactions, characteristic of respiratory failure of another genesis. At the same 
time, there may be signs of Hirschsprung’s disease (about 20% of patients), neurological symptoms. At the heart of the disease 
is a mutation of gene with defects of РНOX2B, confirmed in the described case. In our patient an absence of continuation of 
episodes of apnea after release of the baby from a period of newborn infancy caused a late diagnosis of the disease. Treatment 
is in ensuring of adequate ventilation. It is preferred to use non-invasive methods of artificial ventilation of the lungs: ventilation 
with a constant positive pressure, various types of oxygen masks. If it is impossible to use them, a tracheostomy is applied. An 
implantation of a stimulator of the diaphragmatic nerve is realized in Children older than 18 months.
Key  words:  congenital  central  hypoventilation  syndrome,  hypoventilation,  respiratory  failure,  PHOX2B  gene,  hypercapnia, 
respiratory acidosis.
For citation: Tolstova E.M., Zaitseva N.S., Zaytseva O.V. et al. Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome (“Ondine’s curse”*) 
in a child of twins (clinical case) // RMJ. 2018. № 5(II). P. 92–95.