Progressive liver disease: а deficiency of lysosomal acid lipase (clinical cases)
Ageeva N.V.1, Agapova I.A.1, Amelina E.L.2, Gundobina O.S.3, Zharkova M.S.4, Kamenets E.A.5, Mikhaylova S.V.6, 
Pechatnikova N.L.7, Sosnovsky A.E.1

1 Penza Regional Pediatric Clinical Hospital named after N. F. Filatov
2 City Clinical Hospital named after D. D. Pletnyov of Moscow Health Department
3 National Medical Research Center for Children’s Health, Moscow
4 Sechenov University, Moscow
5 Research Centre of Medical Genetics of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow
6 Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow
7 Morozovskaya Children’s City Clinial Hospital of Moscow Health Department

Lysosomal Acid Lipase Deficiency (LALD) is a progressive hereditary disease characterized by impaired metabolism of lipids 
and associated with high mortality and a risk of terminal damage to various organs, including a liver, spleen, kidneys, and heart 
vessels. Depending on age of manifestation of the disease, two clinical forms of the LALD are distinguished: an infantile form, 
previously known as Wolman disease, and an ester storage disease, it is characteristic for children older than 1 year of age 
and adults. Clinical manifestations of the disease are diverse regardless of the form of LALD, which is the reason for delay in 
establishing a correct diagnosis, early disability and death of patients.
Two clinical observations of the LALD are presented in the article: a patient with the ester storage disease and a patient with the 
infantile form of LALD. Both cases demonstrate the most negative prognosis of the disease and importance of timely diagnosis 
of the LALD.

96

РМЖ, 2018 № 5(II)ПедиатрияКлинический разбор
Presence  of  diagnostic  criteria  for  the  LALD  allows  suspecting  the  disease  in  time  and  conduct  a  test  for  determination  of 
lysosomal acid lipase activity by method of dry spots to confirm the diagnosis. This is necessary for early initiation of adequate 
therapy.
Key words: lysosomal acid lipase, Wolman disease, cholesterol ester storage disease, sebelipase alfa.
For  citation:  Ageeva  N.V.,  Agapova  I.A.,  Amelina  E.L.  et  al.  Progressive  liver  disease:  а  deficiency  of  lysosomal  acid  lipase 
(clinical cases) // RMJ. 2018. № 5(II). P. 96–103.