The efficacy of conservative therapy in ENT injuries and surgery
Shpigel' A.S., Seredavina N.Yu.

Samara State Medical University, Samara, Russia

Summary
Early diagnosis and treatment choice in ENT injuries and surgery is still an important issue in modern otorhinolaryngology. Treatment approach is based on
the early and appropriate drainage of infectious focus. This procedure is an obligatory and primary measure regardless of patient severity. However, final
outcome mainly depends on the efficacy of the therapy. Complex homeopathic remedies can be combined with both traditional pharmacotherapy and vari-
ous physiotherapeutic methods.
The paper discusses the results of prospective controlled clinical study on the efficacy of Traumeel® S and Mucosa compositum in the conservative treatment
of ear and upper airways injuries as well as in the postoperative period after ENT surgery. The efficacy of the treatment in posttraumatic and postoperative
periods was analyzed in 101 patients who received homeopathy and in 63 patients who received traditional pharmacotherapy.
Traumeel® S and Mucosa compositum were prescribed according to the principles of clinical pharmacology. Homeopathy improved subjective and objective
clinical signs, parameters of cytology and biochemistry, and nasal breath. Specific treatment regimens using complex medications are described. The study
of wound healing with homeopathy enabled to develop a novel rational regimen of homeopathic therapy in ENT injuries and postoperative period after ENT
surgery. This optimized approach reduces treatment duration and the rate of complications and side effects of traditional drugs as well as improves cosmet-
ic and functional outcomes.
Key words: ear and upper airways injuries, ear and external nasal reconstruction, bilateral tonsillectomy, complex homeopathic remedies, Traumeel® S, Mu-
cosa compositum.
For citation: Shpigel' A.S., Seredavina N.Yu. The efficacy of conservative therapy in ENT injuries and surgery // RMJ. Otorhinolaryngology. 2016. № 4.