Vocal cord dysfunction (laryngoneurosis) and asthma: the problems of differential diagnosis
Karpova O.Yu., Svistushkin V.M.

I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia

Summary
Vocal cord dysfunction which manifests as reflex cough mimics or accompanies bronchial asthma. Etiology and prevalence of this condition are mainly un-
known. The paper discusses current diagnostic and treatment approaches to the reflex cough. Factors which provoke reflex cough as well as pathogenesis
of the disease are described. The primary cause of reflex cough is neurogenic hyperventilation, i.e., hyperventilation syndrome. Therefore, reflex cough
persists even after eradication of triggers. Diagnostic criteria of reflex (psychogenic) cough are specified. Psychodiagnostic testing revealed changes in
personality structure with psychasthenia, hypochondria, and depression as well as high levels of anxiety characterized by the predominance of personal
anxiety over reactivity in 22 of 26 patients. Highly effective and safe complex treatment of psychogenic reflex cough was introduced. This algorithm in-
cludes: 1. eradication of the trigger (as far as possible); 2. psychotherapy; 3. respiratory gymnastic (to treat hyperventilation syndrome); 4. reflex therapy
(intradermal novocaine blocks of Zaharin Ged zones for the larynx); 5. therapy with vitamins and calcium; 6. sedative therapy. Complex conservative
treatment of 1 or 2 courses (in 10 sessions each) was performed in more than 300 patients with reflex cough. In almost all patients, the treatment stopped
the coughing or minimized it and reduced laryngospasm. The patients were more tranquil, their fears disappeared and the sleep improved, they readapted
to work. In patients with concomitant asthma and reflex cough, the removal of reflex component improved disease course.
Key words: vocal cord dysfunction, laryngoneurosis, reflex cough, asthma, hyperventilation syndrome, reflex therapy, Zaharin Ged zones respiratory
gymnastic, psychotherapy.
For citation: Свистушкин В.М., Карпова О.Ю. Vocal cord disfunction (laryngonevrosis) and bronchial asthma: the problem of differential diagnostics //
RMJ. Оtorhinolaryngology. 2016. № 4. P. 269–272.