Food additive for male infertility
Bozhedomov V.A.1−4, Lipatova N.A.2, Bozhedomova G.E.2,3, Shcherbakova E.V.2, Komarina R.A.2

1 Outpatient Department No. 1 of the Department for Presidential Affairs, Moscow
2 N.A. Semashko Road Clinical Hospital, Moscow
3 I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University
4 Peoples' Friendship University of Russia, Moscow

Half of the barren marriage cases accounts for male infertility. The most common causes (35−40%) of male infertility are idiopathic oligospermia, as-
thenospermia, and/or teratospermia. In these cases, abnormal sperm quantity and quality are not associated with anamnestic risk factors, abnormal med-
ical examinations or hormonal imbalances. Antioxidants are popular agents for male infertility, however, their efficacy is controversial.
Aim. To analyze the efficacy of domestic bioactive additive AndroDoz® for idiopathic male infertility.
Patients and methods. 30 men from infertile couples aged 25−45 were enrolled. Ejaculate was examined according to WHO recommendations (including ROS
measurement in native ejaculate and washed spermatozoa). Chromosomal aberrations in spermatozoa were assessed by DNA fragmentation evaluated with
sperm chromatin dispersion test. Ejaculate was tested before and in the course of the treatment (oral AndroDoz® 2 capsules twice a day).
Results. After 1.5 months, the percentage and the degree of DNA fragmentation reduced by 5% and 10%, respectively, in two-third of the patients (p<0.01).
The severity of oxidative stress decreased more than twice in 70% of the patients (p<0.05). Standard spermogram parameters remained unchanged.
Conclusions. AndroDoz® can be recommended for idiopathic male infertility with oxidative stress and altered DNA integrity of spermatozoa. Two-third of the
patients respond to this treatment demonstrating sperm quality improvement.
Key words: male infertility, oxidative stress, DNA fragmentation, antioxidants.
For citation: Bozhedomov  V.A., Lipatova N.A., Bozhedomova G.E. et al. Food additive for male infertility // RMJ. 2016. № 23. P. 1546–1552.