Features of nonspecific prevention and treatment of patients with exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis
Ryazantsev S.V., Krivopalov A.A., Eremin S.A.
Saint Petersburg Research Institute of Ear, Throat, Nose and Speech

Sore throat remains one of the most frequent reasons for prescribing antibiotic therapy, despite the fact that in the nature of this pathology, a significant role
belongs to pathogens that do not etiologically require it. Usage of modern methods of express diagnostics in clinical practice will allow to avoid unjustified
prescription of antibiotics for this symptom. Chronic pathology of palatine tonsils plays an important role in tonsillofaringitis, causing persistent disturbances
of microbiocenosis, local and systemic immunity, contributes to more frequent exacerbations.The use of immunostimulating preparations of bacterial lysates
in chronic pathology of palatine tonsils allows to achieve a more rapid remission in the patient and to preserve it by influencing the microbiocenosis, estab-
lished in chronic tonsillitis, and immune response at the local and general levels.
Aim: to evaluate the effectiveness of the drug Ismigen on the course and severity of exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis during the epidemiological season of
acute respiratory infections.
Patients and Methods: 60 patients were examined and divided into 2 groups. The control group was formed by 30 patients receiving standard therapy. 30
patients of the study group received the Ismigen drug in addition to the standard therapy. The drug was prescribed sublingually 1 tablet 30 minutes before
meal once a day during 10 days. In addition to therapy during the exacerbation period, the study included two Ismigen courses of 10 days to prevent recur-
rence of exacerbation and to obtain a more stable effect. 
Results: a statistically significant difference between subjective indices in patients using Ismigen and undergoing treatment without it was revealed on the
third visit and increased steadily with the more pronounced positive dynamics in the study group until the sixth visit. In the study of objective indices the
same dynamics were observed.
Conclusion: The use of immunostimulating therapy with Ismigen during the exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis (acute tonsillopharyngitis) and acute respira-
tory viral infection can not only reduce the severity of complaints in patients and clinical manifestations of the disease, but also shorten the time of disease
and reduce the need for additional antibiotic therapy.
Key words: chronic tonsillitis, exacerbation, acute tonsillopharyngitis, Streptatest, immunostimulants, bacterial lysates, Ismigen.
For citation: Ryazantsev S.V., Krivopalov A.A., Eremin S.A. Features of nonspecific prevention and treatment of patients with exacerbation of chronic tonsillitis
// RMJ. 2017. № 23. P. 1688–1694.