Possibilities of topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in patients with pain syndrome after tonsillectomy
Asmanov А.I.1,2, Pivneva N.D.1.2, Degtyareva D.V.3

1 Moscow Scientific Research Clinical Institute of Pediatrics named after Acad. Yu.E. Veltishchev, Moscow
2 Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow
3 Scientific and Clinical Center of Otorhinolaryngology of FMBA of Russia, Moscow

Tonsillectomy is one of the most frequent operations in otorhinolaryngological practice. However, today there are no definite recommendations for the man-
agement of pain syndrome in the postoperative period in children and adolescents.
The aim of our study was to evaluate the efficacy of the topical form (tablets for resorption) of flurbiprofen for relieving the pain syndrome in patients after
tonsillectomy.
Patients and Methods: the study included 60 patients aged from 12 to 18 years with a diagnosis of chronic tonsillitis, decompensated form. The main group
consisted of patients who received, after surgery, flurbiprofen 1 tablet 3 t. / day for 5 days. Patients of the control group received systemic analgesic therapy
with ketoprofen (2 ml intramuscularly). Subjective evaluation of the severity of the pain syndrome was carried out by filling in special questionnaires on the
first and subsequent days after the operation.
Results of the study: the mean score of the pain intensity at rest in the postoperative period was higher in the control group and the dynamics of the decrease
in the average score of the pain syndrome was more pronounced in patients receiving flurbiprofen. Similar data were obtained in assessing the severity of
pain during eating. In the study 3 (10%) of the patient in the control group started to eat solid food already on the 2nd day after the operation, by the 4 th
day, their number was already 18 (60%), which was significantly higher than in the control group - 12 40%).
Conclusion: The results obtained showed a high level of effective and safety of flurbiprofen in the form of tablets for resorption in the management of pain
syndrome in patients after tonsillectomy.
Key words: flurbiprofen, tonsillectomy, pain syndrome, children.
For citation: Asmanov А.I., Pivneva N.D., Degtyareva D.V. Possibilities of topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in patients with pain syndrome after
tonsillectomy // RMJ. 2017. № 23. P. 1707– 1710.