Mental disorders in type 2 diabetic patients
А.Е.  Bobrov1,2,  M.N.  Volodina3,  I.N.  Agamamedova1,  T.E.  Nikitina1,  Yu.V.  Karachyova1,  D.A.  Tretyakova1,  М.А.  Parpara1,  
E.G. Starostina3.
1 National Medical Research Center of Psychiatry and Narcology named after V. P. Serbskiy, Moscow
2 Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow
3 Moscow Regional Research and Clinical Institute named after M. F. Vladimirskiy
The review presents an analysis of literature on the prevalence and types of mental disorders in type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM2). 
It has been shown that DM2 is frequently associated with depressive and anxiety disorders, eating disorders and cognitive 
dysfunction, including dementia. The presence of psychopathological symptoms commonly hinders differential diagnosis and 
contributes to misinterpretation of the patient´s status. Thus, physical symptoms of depression may imitate the pain syndrome 
similar to that of diabetic neuropathy, whereas clinical manifestations of phobia of hypoglycemia and panic attacks can be 
indistinguishable  from  the  symptoms  of  hypoglycemia.  Patients  with  DM2  and  comorbid  somatoform  disorders  frequently 
undergo multiple examinations with subsequent administration of unnecessary treatment, which, taken together, dramatically 
increase the use of medical resources. Some mental disorders affect the patient’s compliance to the treatment of DM2 and 
quality of life in DM2 patients, as well as may shorten the life expectancy, independently of other factors. Early detection 
and treatment of non-severe (non-psychotic) mental disorders in DM2 can be rather successfully done by endocrinologists, 
internists and general practitioners after appropriate training and supervision.
Key words: diabetes mellitus, mental disorder, cognitive disorder, depression, anxiety, stress-related disorder, eating disorder, 
somatoform disorder.
For citation: Bobrov А.Е., Volodina M.N., Agamamedova I.N. et al. Mental disorders in type 2 diabetic patients // RMJ. 2018. 