Early diagnosis of diabetic polyneuropathy and the use of alpha-lipoic acid to prevent its progression
A. V. Bregovskaya, A. Yu. Babenko, E. V. Grineva

National Medical Research Center named after V. A. Almazov, St. Petersburg

The literature review is devoted to the issues of early diagnosis of diabetic neuropathy (DN), as well as the possibilities of 
preventing its progression. DN is one of the most common complications of diabetes mellitus (DM), and it is a pathogenetic 
factor in the development of the diabetic foot syndrome, which determines the need not only for its diagnosis at preclinical 
stages, but also for measures to reduce the progression rate. Due to the lack of objective non-invasive methods for assessing the 
damage of small nerve fibers in the early stages, it is necessary to look for new diagnostic methods, such as corneal confocal 
microscopy (CMR), which not only makes it possible to assess the degree of damage to the corneal nerves, but also to provide 
new  information  about  the  possibilities  of  pathogenetic  therapy  of  DN  at  pre-clinical  stages.  Currently,  the  DN  therapy  is 
based on the compensation of DM with the minimization of the variability of glycemia during the day, the correction of other 
complications  of  diabetes  and  concomitant  diseases,  anticonvulsants,  antideprimants  and  opioid  analgesics  therapy  when 
developing painful forms of DN, as well as pathogenetic therapy aimed at reducing the of the lesion nerve fibers progression. 
Numerous sources indicate the prescribing of alpha-lipoic acid (ALA) preparations as an effective and safe pathogenetic therapy 
within the framework of complex DN treatment. The increase in the efficiency of ALA against the background of strict glycemic 
control is shown, as well as optimal control of cardiovascular complication risks.
Key words: diabetes mellitus, diabetic neuropathy, early diagnosis, small nerve fibres, corneal confocal microscopy, alpha lipoic acid.
For citation: Bregovskaya A.V., Babenko A.Yu., Grineva E.V. Early diagnosis of diabetic polyneuropathy and the use of alpha-
lipoic acid to prevent its progression // RMJ. 2018. № 1 (I). P. 41–46.