Prevention of recurrence of acute cystitis
Nashivochnikova N.A., Krupin V.N.

Nizhny Novgorod State Medical Academy

Cystitis is one of the most common diseases in women, usually of reproductive age. Despite a wide selection of pharmacological drugs, the problem of treat-
ment of acute cystitis and others urinary tract infections is very urgent today. There is a continuous search for the new methods of treatment and prevention
of infections of the lower urinary tract, and a modern phytotherapy takes a special place in treating the pathology of the urinary tract. According to the Eu-
ropean Association of Urology Guidelines (2010), the cranberry preparations are recommended for a widespread use to prevent the recurrence of cystitis.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of dietary supplement Cystenium, containing the extract of cranberry (Vaccinium oxycoccos), for the
prevention of recurrence of cystitis.
Patients and methods. Two groups of patients were selected. The clinical group – 30 patients with relapse of acute cystitis, received antimicrobial treatment
with the dietary supplement Cystenium. The control group consisted of 32 patients who received only antibacterial therapy. Results were evaluated after 14
days, 2 and 4 months.
Results. The positive experience of using the dietary supplement Cystenium in 30 women with a cystitis clinic is shown. Data were obtained on the clinical
and bacteriological effectiveness of the preparation, and also on the absence of significant side effects.
A conclusion was made about the advisability of using the dietary supplement Cystenium to prevent of the recurrence of cystitis after achieving the clinical
improvement, as well as to improve the effectiveness of the course of the initial complex therapy of acute cystitis. Clinical efficacy was 90%.
Key words: Cystenium, cranberry, acute cystitis, relapse, treatment, prevention.
For citation: Nashivochnikova N.A., Krupin V.N. Prevention of recurrence of acute cystitis // RMJ. 2017. № 8. P. 503–505.