Modern principles of treatment of patients with chronic diseases of the lower extremity veins
Chernyakov A.V.

Municipal Clinical Hospital 15 named after O.M. Filatov, Moscow
Russian National Research Medical University named after N.I. Pirogov, Moscow

Chronic diseases of the lower extremity veins include varicose veins, postthrombophlebitic syndrome and congenital malformations of the venous system of the
lower extremities. The tactics of treating patients  with chronic diseases of the lower extremity veins is aimed at eliminating signs of chronic venous insufficiency
(CVI), preventing the progression of the process and its complications, preventing the recurrence of the disease, improving the quality of life. The treatment of
such patients is individual and complex. Conservative therapy is the basis. The example of drugs for the treatment of patients with CVD, is calcium dobesilate
(Doxi-Hem), which has a comprehensive effect on venous system. Doxi-Hem intaking almost 2 times reduces the frequency of nocturnal convulsions and discom-
fort in the patients with chronic diseases of the lower extremity veins, reduces the intensity of feelings of heaviness, pain, paresthesias in the lower extremities
and the severity of lymphatic edema. At the same time, the risk of developing adverse effects when taking the drug remains low over a long period, and it has a
good tolerability. For the compression treatment elastic bands of short and medium stretch are used, however, the use of compression knitted fabrics with varying
degrees of compression is more preferable. Surgical treatment includes various methods used depending on the causes that led to the development of CVI.
Key words: chronic diseases of the lower extremity veins, chronic venous insufficiency, varicose disease of the lower extremities, postthrombophlebitic syn-
drome, phlebotonics, calcium dobezilate.
For citation: Chernyakov A.V. Modern principles of treatment of patients with chronic diseases of the lower extremity veins // RMJ. 2017. № 8. P. 543–547.