Analysis of the effectiveness of screening for the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease in the city clinic
Lisina M.V., Lichman L.A., Grebenkina I.N., Lisin O.E., Katorkin S.E., Kiseleva I.V.

Samara State Medical University

Aim: to determine the role of screening examination in the early diagnosis and effectiveness of treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) in a city
clinic in patients of younger and older age groups.
Patients and methods: we analyzed 189 patients who applied to the Samara State Medical University Clinic during 2016 with complaints for heartburn, pe-
riodic acid reflux after bendover of body, pain in   the xiphosternum area after eating. Most of the patients were initially sent to the emergency surgical hos-
pital of the Samara State Medical University Clinic to exclude emergency surgical pathology. When contacting the clinic of Samara State Medical Universi-
ty, patients were referred to a therapist and a gastroenterologist for an outpatient treatment strategy. All patients were divided into 2 age groups: from 18
to 45 years and from 46 to 65 years. The screening study included a patient questionnaire, GERD screening questionnaire, and an esophagogastroduo-
denoscopy (EGD). The effectiveness of basic therapy in patients of the compared groups was analyzed at 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months. It has been statistically
proven that early screening of GERD can shorten the duration of conservative therapy and achieve a stable remission in a shorter period of time.  
Results: screening of young people more often show GERD of I and II degrees, which makes it possible to prescribe adequate therapy in the early stages of
the disease, stop the progression of the pathological process and avoid serious complications. Patients over 45 years of age had  GERD of a more severe de-
gree, in 50% of cases accompanied with esophagitis, which significantly complicates and reduces the effectiveness of basic therapy. The main screening
method for diagnosing GERD is questioning and identifying risk factors in a survey. 
Conclusion: screening by the GERD questionnaire allows to suspect the disease at an early stage, without a pronounced endoscopic picture, to prescribe base
conservative and to achieve a stable remission in a short time.
Key words: GERD, erosive esophagitis, heartburn, screening, EGD, questionnaire.
For citation: Lisina M.V., Lichman L.A., Grebenkina I.N. et al. Analysis of the effectiveness of screening for the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease
in the city clinic// RMJ. 2017. № 17. P. 1211–1214.