Antihypertensive and cerebral protective efficacy of bisoprolol in patients with hypertension combined with type 2 
diabetes mellitus
A.Yu. Falkovskaya1, V.F. Mordovin1, N.V. Belokopytova2, Yu.V. Usov1, A.E. Suhareva1, T.R. Ryabova1, N.G. Sharypova1

1 Research Institute for Cardiology, Tomsk National Research Medical Center
2 Bureau of Medical and Social Expertise in the Tomsk Region

Aim: to study the interaction of the long-term therapy with bisoprolol on blood pressure, early structural brain damage and wall 
thickness of carotid arteries in patients with hypertension (H) combined with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).
Patients and Methods: 21 patients with H combined with type 2 DM (15 women, mean age 50±6 years) were included in the open 
controlled trial. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM), laboratory tests (glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), blood lipid 
spectrum), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and sonography of carotid arteries were conducted to all patients initially 
and after 6 months of treatment. After the initial examination, the patients received selective beta-blocker bisoprolol at a starting dose 
of 5 mg, which was increased to 10–15 mg/day. The average doses of bisoprolol amounted to 7.25 mg (5–15 mg/day, n=21).
Results: a significant decrease in blood pressure was manifested in both office measurements (17/8.7 mm Hg, p<0.0001) and 
ABPM results (-17.5/-12.1 mm Hg, p<0.0001) after six months of treatment with bisoprolol. The increased blood pressure 

7

РМЖ, 2018 № 11 (I)КардиологияОригинальные статьи
load (systolic/diastolic) decreased by an average of 38.2/37.7%, respectively. Target blood pressure values were achieved in 
71% of patients. Besides, a significant decrease in the thickness of intima-media complex of carotid arteries (from 0.75±0.06 
to 0.68±0.14 mm, p=0.02) was determined, and the MRI results showed an essential decrease in the linear dimensions of the 
ventricular  system  of  the  brain  and  subarachnoid  spaces,  the  severity  of  which  depended  on  the  degree  of  average  values 
reduction of the ABPM parameters. Relevant changes in HbA1C level and lipid spectrum parameters were not manifested.
Conclusion:  a  6-month  therapy  with  bisoprolol  for  patients  with  hypertension  combined  with  type  2  DM  is  followed  by  a 
pronounced antihypertensive effect, decrease in the wall thickness of the carotid arteries and involution of non-clinical MRI 
indications of structural brain damage in the form of reduced severity of liquor-dynamic disturbances.
Key words: hypertension, diabetes mellitus, ambulatory blood pressure monitoring, brain MRI, liquor-dynamic disturbances, 
carotid arteries, bisoprolol, Concor.
For  citation:  Falkovskaya A.Yu.,  Mordovin V.F.,  Belokopytova N.V.  et  al.  Antihypertensive  and  cerebral  protective  efficacy  of 
bisoprolol in patients with hypertension combined with type 2 diabetes mellitus // RMJ. 2018. № 11(I). P. 7–11.