Analysis of cytokine levels in patients with atherosclerosis of peripheral vessels under conditions of technological pollution
G.Zh. Suranova1, E.S. Maynazarova2, R.R. Tuhvatshin3

1 International School of Medicine, Bishkek
2 Research Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Bishkek
3 Ahunbayev Kyrgyz State Medical Academy, Bishkek

Aim: to study the levels of pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines of interleukins 6, 10 (IL-6, IL-10) in patients with atherosclerosis 
of peripheral vessels living in mountainous conditions near uranium tailing dumps.
Patients and Methods: 73 patients were included in this study: main group (MG) — 27 patients living near uranium tailing 
dumps and suffering from obliterating atherosclerosis of vessels of the lower extremities and hypertension (H), control group 1 
(CG-1) — 31 patients with H, control group 2 (CG-2) — 20 healthy persons.
The  following  actions  were  conducted:  filling  in  of  a  specially  designed  case  record,  determination  of  a  state  of  peripheral 
arteries, study of cytokine levels.
Results and Discussion: a statistically significant increase of IL-6 values in the blood of patients with obliterating atherosclerosis 
of vessels of the lower extremity with concomitant hypertension, living on the territory contaminated with uranium radionuclides, 
was found in the group with triglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia and normolipidemia, which mechanisms should be investigated 
further. Registration of IL-10 at the level of reference values indicates the suppression of anti-inflammatory immune response 

27

РМЖ, 2018 № 11 (I)КардиологияОригинальные статьи
mechanisms under conditions of hypoxia and radionuclide load. However, a high content of IL-10 (11.3±1.0) with an increase in 
the concentration of total cholesterol (C) above 6.2 mmol/l may indicate a reactive stimulation of T-lymphocytes responsible for 
the production of cytokines, by increasing the disturbing etiological factors such as an excess of total С, С–LDL, high systemic 
arterial pressure, radionuclide load and hypoxia. In patients with obliterating atherosclerosis of vessels of the lower extremities, 
affected by hypertension, the cytokine ratio is significantly higher than in healthy persons and patients with hypertension.
Conclusion:  patients  with  obliterating  atherosclerosis  of  the  lower  extremity  vessels  with  concomitant  hypertension  living 
on the territory contaminated with uranium radionuclides, having a high content of pro-inflammatory cytokines, even with 
hemodynamically insignificant forms of obliterating atherosclerosis without occlusion and stenosis, should be considered to a 
high-risk group of the atherosclerotic process progression.
Key  words:  cytokines,  interleukin-6,  interleukin-10,  atherosclerosis,  peripheral  vessels,  middle  mountains,  uranium  tailing 
dumps.
For citation: Suranova G.Zh., Maynazarova E.S., Tuhvatshin R.R. Analysis of cytokine levels in patients with atherosclerosis of 
peripheral vessels under conditions of technological pollution // RMJ. 2018. № 11(I). P. 27–30.