Comparative efficacy of injectable and oral symptomatic slow action drugs in the therapy of primary and posttraumatic osteoarthritis of the knee joints.
Udovika M.I.

Clinic of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation for the Ulyanovsk region

The aim of the study was to assess the efficacy and safety of parenteral forms of chondroitin sulfate and glucosamine sulfate when administered via an in-
termittent schedule (alternate days) in patients with primary and post-traumatic osteoarthritis (OA) of knee joints.
Patients and methods. An open, randomized, controlled clinical trial was conducted to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of intramuscular injections of
chondroitin sulfate and glucosamine sulfate according to an intermittent pattern in primary and post-traumatic osteoarthritis therapy of knee joints. The
study involved 102 patients with primary and posttraumatic OA of the knee joints of the I - III X - ray stage according to the Kellgren and Lowrense classifi-
cation, the patients were randomized into 2 groups. The main group included 50 patients who received intramuscular injections of chondroitin sulfate (Chon-
droguard) No. 20 on alternate days and glucosamine sulfate (Sustagard Arthro) No.20on alternate days. The comparison group consisted of 52 patients who
daily took the oral form of chondroitin sulfate and glucosamine hydrochloride ("Arthra" preparation, 2 tablets per day) for 3 months. The study consisted of
three stages with the assessement of the pain according to VAS at rest and walking, the total Lequesne index and the biochemical blood values at baseline,
40 and 90 days after the start of the therapy. Statistical processing was carried out by using the program Statistica Base 6.0.
Results. On the top of already administered therapy the patients in both groups achieved a statistically significant decrease in the level of algofunctional in-
dicators - pain intensity by VAS and Lequesne index. Three months after the cessation of therapy (visit 3) the increase of Lequesne index was not observed
in the patients of the main group, while in the comparison group a statistically significant increase in the Lequesne index was revealed. During the therapy
no negative dynamics of biochemical values was detected in patients of group 1.

446

РМЖ, 2017 № 7


Ревматология

Оригинальные статьи

Conclusions. The tolerability of the parenteral forms of chondroitin sulfate and glucosamine sulfate was assessed by the overwhelming majority of patients
as excellent and good, and there was no negative dynamics of the biochemical blood values. Combination therapy with injection forms of chondroitin sulfate
(Chondroguard) and glucosamine sulfate (Soustagard Arthro) according to the intermittent scheme can be recommended for the start therapy of primary and
post-traumatic OA of knee joints in patients with severe pain syndrome and high risk of comorbidity.
Key words: Osteoarthritis, pain, chondroitin sulfate, glucosamine sulfate, Lequesne index.
For citation: Udovika M.I. Comparative efficacy of injectable and oral symptomatic slow action drugs in the therapy of primary and posttraumatic os-
teoarthritis of the knee joints. // RMJ. 2017. № 4. P. 446–450.