Current methods of pre-clinical diagnostics of visual organ disorders in patients with sarcoidosis
Skornyakov S.N.1,2, Sabadash Е.V.1,2, Medvinsky I.D.1,2, E.A. Egorov2, Demin A.P.2, Peretrukhina M.V.1, Chernenko M.A.1, 
Filatova E.A.2, Dyachkov I.A.1,2, Ivanchikova E.D.1

1 Ural State Medical University, Yekaterinburg
2 Ural research Institute of Phthisiopulmonology, Yekaterinburg

The study is devoted to the evaluation of the informative value of additional methods of examination of the visual organs in 
pulmonary and extrapulmonary sarcoidosis.
Aim: to evaluate the informative value of optical coherent tomography (OCT) of the visual organ in pulmonary sarcoidosis.
Patients and Methods: a prospective study was conducted, it included 36 patients (72 eyes). Depending on the presence or 
absence of a diagnosis of sarcoidosis, two groups were formed. The first study group consisted of patients with verified newly 
diagnosed pulmonary and extrapulmonary sarcoidosis, it included 18 people (36 eyes). The second group was the control group, 
consisted of patients with tuberculosis of various locations and included 18 people (36 eyes).
Results: in the group of patients with pulmonary and extrapulmonary sarcoidosis, the vast majority of patients did not 
have complaints on the part of the visual organs, however, in the study of the retina with the help of an OCT, pathological 
changes were observed in the form of edema, retinal detachment and degenerative changes. In the group of patients with 
pulmonary and musculoskeletal tuberculosis, neither complaints on the part of visual organs nor changes in the retina 
were detected.
Conclusions: OCT is a high-precision method of early diagnosis, which allows to make an intravital non-invasive eye biopsy at 
the tissue level. OCT of the retina should be performed for all patients with pulmonary and extrapulmonary sarcoidosis for early 
diagnosis and prevention of serious complications such as significant vision loss and irreversible blindness.
Key words: sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, optical coherence tomography.
For citation: Skornyakov S.N., Sabadash Е.V., Medvinsky I.D. et al. Current methods of pre-clinical diagnostics of visual organ 
disorders in patients with sarcoidosis // RMJ. 2018. № 3(I). P. 9–11.