Cardiovascular pathology in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: how do we treat it?
Ovcharenko S.I.

Sechenov University, Moscow

Cardiovascular pathology in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the most frequent comorbid 
conditions in the clinic of internal diseases. Its high frequency is caused by both genetic disposition and general risk factors 
(smoking, old age, male sex, sedentary lifestyle, obesity, etc.). The COPD patients often suffer from arterial hypertension (AH), 
ischemic heart disease (IHD), including myocardial infarction and angina pectoris, arrhythmias and heart failure (HF). AH in 
patients with COPD has a number of significant features, referring mainly to the night period, which requires the intensification 
of antihypertensive therapy in the evening and night hours. This understanding is especially important in the development of 
treatment programs for hypertension in this category of patients. Taking into account the fact that the basis of cardiovascular 
pathology should be considered as a result of endothelial dysfunction and its consequences, in the treatment of such patients it 
is necessary to use drug therapy, including medications that positively influence the state of the endothelium. Indapamide with 
prolonged action is used for the treatment of hypertension.
To date, we have already accumulated a certain positive experience, including our personal one, of the use of highly selective 
adrenoblockers  in  patients  suffering  from  cardiovascular  diseases  (IHD,  AH  +  IHD,  HF)  in  combination  with  COPD,  which 
indicate their safety in effecting the respiratory function in this category of patients. The GOLD program postulates, that the 
treatment of cardiovascular disease in COPD patients should be carried out in the same way as without COPD, and, in turn, the 

36

РМЖ, 2018 № 10 (I)Болезни дыхательных путейСмежные проблемы
treatment of COPD in patients with a combined cardiovascular pathology should be carried out in the same way as in COPD 
patients without this pathology. When treating this category of patients, it is necessary to use such medications that do not 
worsen the course of each of them, and in some cases improve. The article substantiates the use of such medications in patients 
with COPD who have combined cardiovascular pathology.
Key  words:  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease,  cardiovascular  diseases,  arterial  hypertension,  ischemic  heart  disease, 
heart failure, drug therapy for cardiovascular disease in COPD.
For citation: Ovcharenko S.I. Cardiovascular pathology in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: how do we 
treat it? // RMJ. 2018. № 10 (I). P. 36–39.